Abstract
Long COVID represents the constellation of post-acute and long-term health effects caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection; it is a complex, multisystem disorder that can affect nearly every organ system and can be severely disabling. The cumulative global incidence of long COVID is around 400 million individuals, which is estimated to have an annual economic impact of approximately $1 trillion—equivalent to about 1% of the global economy. Several mechanistic pathways are implicated in long COVID, including viral persistence, immune dysregulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, complement dysregulation, endothelial inflammation and microbiome dysbiosis. Long COVID can have devastating impacts on individual lives and, due to its complexity and prevalence, it also has major ramifications for health systems and economies, even threatening progress toward achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Addressing the challenge of long COVID requires an ambitious and coordinated—but so far absent—global research and policy response strategy. In this interdisciplinary review, we provide a synthesis of the state of scientific evidence on long COVID, assess the impacts of long COVID on human health, health systems, the economy and global health metrics, and provide a forward-looking research and policy roadmap.

Long COVID is best defined as the constellation of post-acute and long-term health effects caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection. Long COVID was initially reported by patients who coined the term and, through research and advocacy, drove much of the progress in understanding this condition over the past several years.

Long COVID is a complex, multisystem disorder that affects nearly every organ system, including the cardiovascular system, the nervous system, the endocrine system, the immune system, the reproductive system and the gastrointestinal system. It affects people across the age spectrum (from children to older adults), people of different race and ethnicities, sex and gender, and baseline health status. Cardinal manifestations include brain fog (or cognitive dysfunction), fatigue, dysautonomia (which commonly manifests as postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS)) and post-exertional malaise. Many of the health effects seen in long COVID are shared across several infection-associated chronic conditions, also called post-acute infection syndromes.

The epidemiology of long COVID is influenced by various factors. The Omicron variant of SARS-CoV-2 is associated with less risk of long COVID than the Delta and pre-Delta variants. Vaccines (before infection) and antivirals (during the acute phase of infection) may reduce the risk of long COVID. Reinfection, on the other hand, is a risk factor for long COVID; even if individuals did not experience long COVID after a first SARS-CoV-2 infection, they remain at risk of developing it with subsequent infections. Reinfection can trigger de novo long COVID or exacerbate the severity of existing long COVID. Cumulatively, two infections yield a higher risk of long COVID than one infection and three infections yield a higher risk than two infections.

A unifying thread of evidence across most studies evaluating the risk of long COVID is the finding that the risk increases as the severity of acute infection increases. People who had severe COVID-19 that necessitated hospitalization exhibit a higher risk of long COVID than those with mild COVID-19. However, because most people around the globe had mild COVID-19, they constitute more than 90% of people with long COVID, despite their lower relative risk compared with that of people with severe COVID-19.

Studies evaluating recovery from long COVID are sparse and inconsistent; this is largely due to use of various definitions, incomplete accounting for all the manifestations of long COVID and misclassification of remission as ‘recovery’. However, studies carefully evaluating individual manifestations show that recovery rates are generally low at 1 year, and several studies show only 7–10% fully recovered at 2 years. Furthermore, some manifestations of long COVID, including heart disease, diabetes, myalgic encephalomyelitis and dysautonomia are chronic conditions that last a lifetime. Adding to this are the concerns about the possible emergence of new latent sequelae—that have not yet been characterized—years after the acute infection.

The impact of long COVID is not limited to the health and well-being of individual patients and their communities. Owing to its prevalence and the breadth of its clinical manifestations, it represents a major public health crisis; it strains health systems and national economies, and threatens progress on global health, including the Sustainable Development Goals.

In this interdisciplinary review, we provide a brief synthesis of the current state of scientific evidence on long COVID, including knowns, unknowns and the key controversies. We provide an assessment of the impacts of long COVID on human health, health systems, the economy and global health metrics and, finally, we provide a forward-looking research and policy roadmap that we hope will stimulate global discussion on how to address the challenge of long COVID.

State of the science on long COVID
The global burden
Estimating the global burden of long COVID presents substantial 
challenges due to the variability in study designs and populations, 
follow-up times, choice of control groups (for example, whether stud-
ies evaluated people with negative SARS-CoV-2 tests or no known 
SARS-CoV-2 infection as controls), assessment of baseline health 
before the infection (to ascertain emergence of a true new health 
condition) and definitions of what constitutes ‘long COVID'48,49. Vari-
ation in risk estimates also reflects the dynamic nature of the pandemic 
itself, which gave rise to many variants and subvariants, each yielding 
potentially different rates of long COVID; the effect of COVID-19 vac-
cines and use of antivirals in the acute phase, which may reduce the 
risk of long COVID; and the effect of SARS-CoV-2 reinfections, which 
contribute additional risk28,29.
Few countries established surveillance systems to estimate the 
burden of long COVID at the population level. Data from the US Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)’s National Health Interview 
Survey show that in 2022, 6.9% of US adults50 and 1.3% of children51 ever 
had long COVID. Data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey—
a nationally representative survey of US adults—found that 6.9% of 
adults had ever had long COVID as of early 2023 (ref. 52 ). Estimates 
from the CDC’s Household Pulse Survey show that prevalence of cur-
rent long COVID in US adults was around 6.7% in March 2024 (ref. 53). 
In the United Kingdom, point prevalence estimates from the Office 
of National Statistics show that 2.9% of the UK population (including 
children) were experiencing self-reported long COVID in March 2023 
(ref. 54). Overall, estimates of the burden of long COVID in the general 
population converge around a point prevalence of 6% to 7% in adults 
and ~1% in children50–54.
Also important are estimates of the incidence of long COVID, which 
can be informed by high-quality meta-analyses of large-scale cohort 
studies among people infected with SARS-CoV-2. For instance, one 
analysis pooled results from 54 studies in 22 countries and estimated 
that approximately 6.2% of symptomatic COVID-19 survivors experi-
ence at least one of three common symptom clusters at 3 months after 
acute infection, across all ages and accounting for different severity 
levels of the initial infection and pre-COVID health status31. This analysis 
only considers three major symptom clusters in long COVID (fatigue 
with bodily pain/mood swings, and cognitive and respiratory symptom 
clusters); however, it sets a conservative benchmark to estimate the 
global risk of long COVID31.
We estimated the global incidence of long COVID on the basis of 
meta-regression studies that pool together all the available evidence31 
(Fig. 2). Incorporating a number of assumptions, including the Institute 
for Health Metrics and Evaluation’s annual estimates of SARS-CoV-2 
infections31,55–59, a proportion symptomatic cases among infections of 
65% (ref. 31), and a reduction in the risk of long COVID for 2022 and 2023 
to account for the putative lower severity of the Omicron variant and 
the effect of vaccination60, we estimated a cumulative global incidence 
of long COVID by the end of 2023 of approximately 400 million. It is 
crucial to emphasize that these estimates only represent cases arising 
from symptomatic infections and are likely to be conservative. The 
actual incidence of long COVID, including cases from asymptomatic 
infections61 or those with a broader range of symptoms, is expected to 
be higher. Furthermore, the estimates do not account for the added bur-
den of long COVID due to reinfection29 and the possibility of latent risks  
(that is, risks that are not yet manifest and may emerge years or decades 
after infection)3,37,41. The emergence of new variants, changes in public 
health measures and changes in the effectiveness and uptake of vac-
cination may also substantially influence these estimates in the future.
While it is challenging to provide estimates of new cases with high 
precision, the current evidence makes it compellingly clear that long 
COVID represents a substantial and ongoing challenge to global health.
Mechanisms of long COVID
The pathophysiological mechanisms of long COVID are still being elu-
cidated2,62, and it is unlikely that a single mechanism can explain the 
broad and heterogeneous set of symptoms and diseases spanning vari-
ous organ systems. Long COVID likely represents a disease with many 
subtypes; each may have their own risk factors, biological mechanisms 
and disease trajectory, and may respond differently to treatments3. 
Multiple pathological pathways may be engaged depending on various 
factors, including prior environmental exposures, genetic makeup, age, 
sex, prior health, microbiome health, viral characteristics (SARS-CoV-2 
variant, viral load), the immune response (which may be influenced by 
prior infections, vaccines and use of immunosuppressive agents) and 
medical treatments (antivirals, steroids). All of these drivers likely shape 
the human host response during the acute phase of SARS-CoV-2 infec-
tion and may trigger pathophysiological mechanisms that ultimately 
produce phenotypes of long COVID.
Several mechanistic pathways have been proposed for long COVID, 
including viral persistence, immune dysregulation, mitochondrial 
dysfunction, complement dysregulation, prothrombotic inflamma-
tion and microbiome dysbiosis3,7,12,63–69 (Fig. 3). Viral persistence (either 
replicating virus or viral RNA or protein fragments)—which may be 
common70—in immune-privileged sites may trigger chronic low-grade 
inflammation and tissue injury 63,71–73, and may correlate with long 
COVID symptomatology72.
Studies have demonstrated persistence of the virus in extrapul-
monary sites, including the brain and coronary arteries, of individuals 
with severe COVID-19 (refs. 68,74). Studies in human and mouse brain 
organoids showed that SARS-CoV-2 infection induces fusion between 
neurons and between neurons and glial cells, which may progressively 
lead to formation of multicellular syncytia compromising neuronal 
activity75. Neuroimaging studies performed in humans 10 months after 
they ‘recovered’ from mild-to-moderate SARS-CoV-2 infection showed 
significant alterations (commensurate with 7 ‘years of healthy aging’) of 
cerebral white matter, including widespread increases of extracellular 
free water and mean diffusivity (indicative of inflammation) encom -
passing all brain lobes76. Pre- and post-SARS-CoV-2 infection imaging 
studies showed structural abnormalities and accelerated aging in the 
brains of people with mild-to-moderate SARS-CoV-2 infection 74,77,78. 
Even in the absence of direct infection in the brain, a transient respira-
tory infection with SARS-CoV-2 induces prolonged neuroinflammatory 
responses, activation of microglial cells and impaired neurogenesis64,77. 
In addition to neuroinflammation, people with brain fog due to long 
COVID were shown to have disrupted blood–brain barriers79.
Abnormalities in the immune system have been documented 
in people with long COVID, including increased humoral responses 
directed against SARS-CoV-2; higher antibody responses against 
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)66, varicella zoster virus (VZV) 66 and cyto -
megalovirus67 (suggesting possible reactivation of herpesviruses80); 
exhausted T cell responses12,66; and uncoordinated cross-talk between 
the cellular and humoral adaptive immunity 12, 13. Autoimmune 
responses triggered by SARS-CoV-2 infection may underlie long COVID 
symptoms81,82. Passive transfer of IgG antibodies from patients with 
long COVID to healthy mice recapitulated heightened pain sensation 
and locomotion deficits82,83.
In the heart, SARS-CoV-2 infects coronary vessels, preferentially 
targeting coronary artery plaque macrophages and inducing plaque 
inflammation68. Vascular disease in long COVID is likely triggered by 
complement activation, red blood cell lysis, platelet activation and 
thromboinflammation—leading to altered coagulation and tissue 
injury67,84. Dysfunctional hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal response 
with inappropriately low levels of cortisol may mediate some of the 
symptomatology observed in long COVID (including fatigue, sleep 
abnormalities and metabolic derangements) 66, and has been seen 
in those with persistent respiratory symptoms of long COVID 80. 
SARS-CoV-2 infection may lead to reduced intestinal absorption of 
tryptophan (a serotonin precursor) and subsequently reduced lev -
els of circulating serotonin, which may impair cognition via reduced 
vagal signaling85. SARS-CoV-2 infection may also lead to mitochondrial 
dysfunction, systemic metabolic abnormalities and abnormal skeletal 
muscle response to exercise—including exercise-induced myopathy 
and tissue infiltration of amyloid-containing deposits and leukocytes65.
The proposed mechanisms of long COVID share similarities with 
those of other post-acute infection syndromes, which are beyond the 
scope of this article and are discussed in detail elsewhere24.
Prevention, treatment and care models
Non-pharmaceutical interventions (for example, masking, improved 
indoor air quality) can reduce the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection and 
consequently reduce the risk of long COVID. COVID-19 vaccines may 
partially reduce the risk of long COVID in adults by 15–70% (mean, 
~40%)86–89; they may also partially reduce the risk of long COVID in chil-
dren90,91. In nonhospitalized individuals (mild-to-moderate COVID-19) 
who have at least one risk factor for the development of severe COVID-
19, use of the SARS-CoV-2 antivirals (ritonavir-boosted nirmatrelvir 
and molnupiravir) in the acute phase may reduce the risk of long 
COVID92–97. However, the effectiveness of these antivirals in reducing 
risk of long COVID in low-risk groups, including younger individuals 
with no comorbidities98, has not been evaluated. Simnotrelvir—a new 
SARS-CoV-2 antiviral available in China99—resulted in earlier reduction 
in viral load and faster resolution of acute symptoms (than placebo)100, 
but its effectiveness against long COVID has not yet been evaluated. 
Exploratory analyses showed that another new SARS-CoV-2 antivi-
ral, ensitrelvir (currently available in Japan), reduced the risk of long 
COVID when initiated in the acute phase of COVID-19 (refs. 101,102). 
Furthermore, metformin (initiated within 7 days of SARS-CoV-2 infec-
tion) has been shown to reduce the risk of long COVID in a randomized 
controlled trial103.
Evidence for long COVID treatments is beginning to emerge, but 
it is still limited. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial 
showed that treatment with a synbiotic preparation (a gut microbiome 
modulator) alleviated multiple symptoms of long COVID—highlight-
ing the need to further explore microbiome modulators as potential 
therapeutics in this setting 104. Another randomized, controlled trial 
showed that a 15-day course of ritonavir-boosted nirmatrelvir did not 
reduce the burden of long COVID symptoms in comparison to ritonavir 
with placebo105.
Due to near-total absence of evidence from randomized clinical 
trials to guide treatment decisions, approaches for the assessment and 
treatment of respiratory sequelae106, cardiovascular complications107, 
fatigue108, cognitive symptoms 109, autonomic dysfunction (includ -
ing POTS)110–114 and neuropsychiatric impairment 115,116 in adults and 
children117 are based on evidence of treating similar symptomatology 
from other conditions—including myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and Gulf War illness26,118–120.
Care for people with long COVID varies widely across settings and 
practitioners118,119,121–123. It is often challenged by lack of widespread 
recognition and understanding of long COVID among medical profes-
sionals, constrained resources and competing demands on healthcare 
systems still recovering from the shock of the pandemic, lack of stand-
ardized care pathways, lack of definitive diagnostic and treatment 
tools, and a general pervasive pandemic fatigue with an urge to ‘move 
on’124,125. Much of the global burden of long COVID remains undiag -
nosed, particularly in low-resource settings, and in many instances are 
erroneously attributed to psychosomatic causes126.
Overall, care models for long COVID are evolving, with sub -
stantial variability across health systems 127. While there is still 
no empirical evidence evaluating comparative effectiveness of  
long COVID care models 121 , optimal models should be context 
dependent—based on available resources, expertise and the popu-
lation being served 121,128.
Impacts of long COVID
In addition to its impact on patients’ daily lives and health outcomes, 
long COVID has a devastating impact on communities and can have 
wide-reaching ramifications for health systems, national economies 
and global health metrics.
Impact on individuals and communities
Long COVID drastically affects patients’ well-being and sense of self, as 
well as their ability to work, socialize, care for others, manage chores 
and engage in community activities—which also affects patients’ fami-
lies, caregivers and their communities129. Over three quarters of peo-
ple with long COVID report a moderate or severe impact on general 
well-being130. The high rates of cognitive and physical symptoms also 
affect individuals’ identity and sense of self. One in four people with 
long COVID limit activities outside work in order to continue working131. 
Many patients with long COVID experience social exclusion, isolation 
and stigma, often from medical providers43,132–134. These challenges 
are exacerbated by societal barriers to the inclusion of people with 
disabilities and chronic illnesses.
Impact on health systems
Because of the large burden of long COVID and its multisystemic 
effects135, it has profound impacts on health systems 136,137. Patients 
with long COVID frequently require ongoing medical care and mul -
tiple specialist consultations to manage their complex symptoms. 
This increased demand exacerbates existing pressures on health sys-
tems, leading to longer wait times, potential delays in essential care 
and increased costs. In the United States, people with long COVID 
are more likely to report unmet healthcare needs in the past year 
because of costs and difficulties finding a clinician and getting an 
appointment when needed138. These issues are exacerbated in low- and 
middle-income countries 126,139. Furthermore, the lack of standard -
ized diagnostic criteria, treatment protocols and models of care for 
long COVID adds to the complexity and places additional burdens on 
healthcare providers137,140,141.
Perhaps the most enduring challenge to health systems lies in the 
rise in the burden of non-communicable diseases (NCDs; for example, 
cardiovascular disease and diabetes) as a consequence of SARS-CoV-2 
infection4,5,9,10,15,136,142–152. NCDs are chronic conditions that require life-
long care, impact health system utilization (competing for access and 
quality of care) and raise healthcare costs137.
Impact on economies
Long COVID strains individual financial health153 and has wide and deep 
ramifications on national economies154–159. In addition to the substan-
Impact on economies
Long COVID strains individual financial health153 and has wide and deep 
ramifications on national economies154–159. In addition to the substan-
tial direct healthcare costs160, there is also financial strain on support 
services and disability benefits. In addition, long COVID affects labor 
participation, employment and productivity of impacted individuals 
and their caregivers129,156,161–163—resulting in depleted savings, food and 
housing insecurity131,164 and negative impact on labor supply, thereby 
fueling labor shortages156. Studies indicate a significant percentage of 
individuals with long COVID experience a reduced ability to work or 
may be unable to work at all165. A report by the US Brookings Institute 
estimated that between 2 and 4 million US adults were out of work 
because of long COVID in 2022 (ref. 165). A US Federal Reserve Bank 
report found that people with long COVID had 10% less likelihood of 
being employed and worked 25% to 50% fewer hours when employed 
than uninfected individuals166. Survey data from the UK’s Trades Union 
Congress show that 20% of people with long COVID were not working 
and that an additional 16% were working reduced hours167. An analysis 
by the European Commission suggested that long COVID had a negative 
impact on the European labor supply of 0.2–0.3% in 2021 and 0.3–0.5% 
in 2022 (ref. 168).
Quantitative estimates of the total economic impact of long COVID 
remain preliminary. A study in 2022 estimated the economic cost of 
three key parameters in the United States, including lost quality of 
life ($2,195 billion), cost of lost earning ($997 billion) and spending on 
healthcare ($528 billion), for up to a total cost of $3.7 trillion154,155—this 
amounts to $11,000 per capita or 17% of the 2019 gross domestic prod-
uct (GDP). These economic losses are on par with the global 2008 Great 
Recession. Assumptions included in these estimates are that burden of 
disability from long COVID is on par with that of ME/CFS and that long 
COVID lasts on average for 5 years155.
Among OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development) countries, a preliminary conservative estimate sug -
gested that excluding the direct costs of healthcare, long COVID is likely 
costing OECD countries as much as $864 billion to $1.04 trillion per 
year due to reductions in quality of life and labor force participation169.  
A recent analysis by the Economist Impact (a think tank of The Econ-
omist) suggested that the economic cost of long COVID in 2024 is 
expected to be around 0.5% to 2.3% of the GDP of several large econo-
mies170 (Table 1). On the basis of all the available data, a conservative 
estimate of the annual global economic toll of long COVID could be 
around $1 trillion amounting to 1% of the 2024 global GDP154,155,169,170.
Impact on the SDGs
The profound immediate health, social and economic shocks trig -
gered by the COVID-19 pandemic have undermined the ability of 
many countries to achieve the SDGs by 2030 (ref. 171). In addition to 
the immediate effect of the pandemic, its long tail—in the form of long  
COVID—presents a more profound and enduring challenge to SDGs 
than the direct initial disruptions171.
Long COVID’s multifaceted impact jeopardizes progress across 
many SDGs, particularly those aimed at promoting health and eco -
nomic well-being, and reducing inequalities172–179. Long COVID can limit 
access to and quality of healthcare 136,137, reduce labor participation, 
worsen poverty and hinder economic productivity169, and exacerbate 
existing inequalities180–183. Table 2 lists the impacts of long COVID on 
several of the SDGs and identifies which collaborative, multi-sectoral 
partnerships and actions are needed to address these impacts.
The full extent to which long COVID will undermine the SDGs is still 
evolving and is difficult to fully quantify174,175; a deeper understanding 
of the full scope and scale of this impact is needed.
Research and policy roadmaps
Substantial work lies ahead to address the broad and multifaceted chal-
lenges posed by long COVID—including preventing further increase in 
the number of people with long COVID and addressing the care needs 
of people already impacted184. Responding to these challenges will 
require coordinated, long-term policy response and visionary research 
strategies, guided by the principles of health equity and patient centere-
dness185–187. We developed the following research and policy roadmaps 
on the basis of our assessment of the evidence and policy gaps, as well 
as our own clinical, research and policy experience and in partnership 
with patients.
Research roadmap
Biological mechanisms. Leading mechanistic hypotheses (discussed 
above) should be examined carefully, particularly for their interactions 
and potential to guide disease management, trials to test existing drugs 
and the development of new drugs3. Continued investigation (via ani-
mal models188,189 or other approaches) of neuroinflammation, immune 
dysregulation, sex differences 190, tissue damage and susceptibility 
features, including genomic 191, epigenomic192–194 and other '-omics', 
is warranted. In evaluating the mechanisms of long COVID, detailed 
assessment of specific manifestations, for example, understanding 
the pathophysiology of post-exertional malaise, may yield mechanistic 
insights that guide clinical management65,195,196.
That SARS-CoV-2 leads to long COVID is unlikely to be a unique 
property; many other viral agents (including influenza, SARS, Mid -
dle East respiratory syndrome, EBV, Dengue, Ebola, Polio, Chikun -
gunya, West Nile virus, Ross River virus, Coxsackie B and VZV) and 
nonviral agents (Coxiella burnetii, Borrelia, Giardia lamblia) also lead 
to post-acute and long-term health effects24,197. A deeper understand-
ing of the similarities and distinctions in the biological mechanisms 
of long COVID and other infection-associated chronic conditions is 
needed2,3,24–26,198–214.
Diagnostics. A research agenda is needed to foster the development, 
testing and validation of more advanced imaging, new blood tests, 
molecular probes, '-omics' and novel approaches to tissue investiga-
tion and analyses—toward better diagnosis of long COVID. Traditional 
imaging techniques may not reveal abnormalities in long COVID that 
may be evident in more advanced imaging. For example, new imag -
ing technologies, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with 
xenon-129 (129XE-MRI)215 for lungs, diffusion MRI to map glial activity216,
ing technologies, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with 
xenon-129 (129XE-MRI)215 for lungs, diffusion MRI to map glial activity216, 
imaging for glymphatic functioning217 and arterial spin labeling MRI218 
for cerebral blood flow, have identified abnormalities in long COVID 
where conventional imaging has not. In a preliminary study, imaging 
flow cytometry was shown to detect fibrin microclots, which may be 
more abundant in people with long COVID than controls219. Whole-body 
positron emission tomography imaging using a highly selective radi-
otracer ([18F]F-AraG) that allows anatomical quantification of activated 
T lymphocytes, showed increased radiotracer uptake indicative of T cell 
activation in various anatomic sites (for example, spinal cord, lungs) 
that were associated with long COVID220. These imaging modalities—
along with other approaches—should be further investigated for their 
potential to establish diagnosis of long COVID, to guide trial designs, 
and for targeted disease management.
Biomarkers are helpful, not only as diagnostics, but also to aid 
in risk stratification (to guide trials and choice of treatment), deter -
mine potential subtypes of disease, and assess severity, prognosis and 
response to treatment. Candidate biomarkers include immune cell 
phenotypes, cytokines/chemokines, immunoglobulins, complement 
and coagulation proteins, acute phase proteins, endocrine markers and 
markers of neurologic or vascular injury66,67,73,221,222. Integrated '-omics' 
analyses223,224, including genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic225, pro-
teomic226–228, metabolomic229, lipidomic230, and microbiome231 profil-
ing, may help identify fingerprints for various types of long COVID. 
However, because of the complexity of long COVID and its diverse 
manifestations, which likely represent distinct mechanistic pathways, a 
single or even a panel of laboratory tests may not achieve high-enough 
performance. Sequela-specific approaches for biomarker discovery 
may also be productive221.
In addition to imaging modalities and biomarkers, harnessing 
health data from wearable biosensors and other sources may also be 
useful for diagnosis and to identify triggers and track disease activity.
Epidemiology and clinical course.  Studies to understand the inci -
dence, prevalence, severity and trajectory of long COVID over time are 
critical35,36,232,233. Comprehensive understanding of risk factors, includ-
ing social determinants of health, genetic, environmental, dietary, 
health behavior (for example, smoking) and other risks of long COVID, 
is also important.
Research to identify the putative subtypes (or clusters of sequelae) 
of long COVID has yielded variable results thus far234–237; greater clarity 
is needed on putative subtypes and how might they differ in terms of 
epidemiological features (for example, risk factors), clinical course 
and potential response to treatment.
Real-world evidence using high-quality data and advanced causal 
inference approaches (for example, target trial emulation) to evaluate 
effectiveness of therapeutic interventions will complement evidence 
generated by randomized trials238,239. This is particularly relevant in the 
evaluation of the long-term effects of therapeutic interventions and 
risks of rare adverse events; trials may have a relatively short follow-up, 
limiting assessment of long-term outcomes. Moreover, trials may not 
be adequately powered to detect rare adverse events.
Because long COVID is a new entity (it has been in existence for less 
than 5 years), longitudinal studies to characterize the long-term health 
trajectories of people with long COVID—up to 10 years, 20 years and 
30 years—are needed, to understand rates and predictors of recovery 
and relapse of the various manifestations. These long-term studies 
will also help identify any latent consequences of the disease (that is, 
impacts that have not yet been realized) and secondary consequences
will also help identify any latent consequences of the disease (that is, 
impacts that have not yet been realized) and secondary consequences 
(for example, the downstream health effects that emanate from long 
COVID). For example, understanding whether people with cognitive 
dysfunction (or brain fog) are at a higher risk of developing neurode-
generative diseases later in life is critical.
Comparative analyses to understand the post-acute and long-term 
health consequences of SARS-CoV-2 infection (and reinfection) versus 
other infections (for example, seasonal and pandemic influenza, res-
piratory syncytial virus infections and others) is important to enhance
our understanding of similarities and differences in their epidemiology 
and clinical course197,240–242.
Quantifying the burden of NCDs attributable to long COVID would 
bring greater clarity to the extent to which billions of SARS-CoV-2 infec-
tions around the world may have impacted the global epidemiology of 
NCDs. The effects of long COVID on global health metrics, including 
SDGs, should also be periodically evaluated.
Trials to test therapeutics for long COVID. When it comes to clinical 
trials for long COVID therapeutics, innovation, urgency and scale are 
all needed243,244. Long COVID is a complex disease with many manifesta-
tions that are likely driven by several different biological mechanisms, 
and may need different therapeutic approaches. Approaches that 
reimagine trial design to incorporate the complexities of the disorder 
and meaningfully incorporate patient input—from trial inception to 
completion—are needed244,245. This may include large-scale platform 
trials with adaptive designs that would test a large battery of potential 
drug candidates to quickly identify treatments for the various forms 
of long COVID.
There is a large array of existing drugs that could be readily repur-
posed and clinically evaluated to address existing hypotheses from viral 
persistence to immune system dysfunction to vascular damage. Some 
of these drugs include SARS-CoV-2 antivirals, neutralizing monoclonal 
antibodies against SARS-CoV-2, non-SARS-CoV-2 antivirals (targeting 
reactivated EBV and VZV), immunomodulators (for example, JAK–STAT 
inhibitors, checkpoint inhibitors), anticoagulants, histamine 1 and 2 
antagonists, metformin, GLP-1 receptor agonists, SGL T2 inhibitors, 
microbiome modulators, anti-inflammatory agents, and drugs that 
improve glymphatic functioning 2,62,246. Research agendas must also 
include development of new antivirals and other new targeted drugs 
to prepare for the possibility that repurposed drugs may not be suf -
ficiently effective 247–249. T esting and evaluation of combinations of 
treatments should also be undertaken when evidence suggests com-
plementary or synergistic mechanisms of action.
Innovation in developing and validating entry criteria and clini -
cal endpoints for long COVID trials is also needed, along with culti -
vating support for these parameters from stakeholders, including 
regulators such as the US Food and Drug Administration and European 
Medicines Agency 250. Endpoints must include newly developed or 
improved patient-reported outcomes specific to long COVID and 
should reflect the often cyclical or relapsing–remitting dynamic of 
many manifestations of long COVID—with particular focus on tracking 
post-exertional malaise, a pathophysiological state that impacts all  
collected data.
Care delivery and health systems research.  Research—including 
comparative analyses—to evaluate the cost and effectiveness of vari-
ous care pathways in improving quality of care and outcomes in people 
with long COVID is needed 121,127,251. Research to identify and address 
health inequities and barriers to effective care, especially in low- and 
middle-income countries, in low-resource settings and in underserved 
communities, is essential252.
Economic impacts.  The effect of long COVID on human capital 253, 
labor participation, productivity losses (workforce absenteeism, pres-
enteeism and disability) and other economic indicators (including job 
retention, career advancement and income instability) should be thor-
oughly evaluated. Research should explore potential disparities in the 
economic impact of long COVID across various demographic groups, 
including racial and ethnic minorities, urban and rural communities, 
socioeconomically marginalized populations, and individuals with 
preexisting health conditions.
In addition, studies are needed to quantify the direct healthcare 
costs associated with long COVID. The costs of disability and support 
systems required to address the needs of people with long COVID 
should be quantified. The strain that these costs pose on payors (insur-
ance providers and governments) should also be evaluated.
Understanding the economic barriers to healthcare access 
and affordability for people with long COVID is also important. This 
includes evaluating out-of-pocket expenses, insurance coverage gaps, 
and disparities in access to care, rehabilitation services and support 
services.
Societal impacts. Long COVID affects individual lives and impacts soci-
etal well-being. Understanding the effects of long COVID on societies 
is important, along with understanding the social responses, the per-
ceptions and the genesis and propagation of stigma. Improved knowl-
edge of the social consequences of being affected by long COVID—for 
example, lost friendships, strained marriages and reduced ability to 
network—along with the interplay between them and health outcomes, 
will help to inform supportive interventions. It will also be important to 
evaluate the burden on caregivers, families and social groups.
Research to develop a deeper understanding of the causes and 
consequences of misinformation, disinformation and anti-science 
rhetoric (for example, long COVID denialism) and how to effectively 
combat them is also needed 254. Identifying ways to improve science 
communication, scientific literacy and public trust in science and 
to bridge the science–policy gap would all help to improve public 
understanding, as well as the scientific and policy responses to long 
COVID254.
Medical anthropology should also contextualize the response 
of the science and medicine profession to long COVID within the 
broader history of medicine. This should include comparative analy -
ses to evaluate and juxtapose the response to long COVID against the 
responses to the aftereffects of the 1889–1892 flu pandemic and the 
1918 flu pandemic and other health crises, including the AIDS crisis 
in the 1980s198,199,201,255–257. Careful anthropologic analysis of how the 
medical profession approached long COVID as a new disease that 
emerged in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic is important.  
It will not only provide historic insights and greater context for our 
collective response, but also offer insights into how we can optimize 
responsiveness to emergence of new infection-associated diseases 
in the future.
Policy roadmap
Given the wide-ranging impact of long COVID on society and the inad-
equate response thus far, priorities for policy changes are vast. Policies 
are necessarily dependent on context, resources and various other 
considerations. The recommendations outlined below are general 
guidelines that may be adapted to fit the needs of various locales.
Prevention of long COVID.  The best way to prevent long COVID is, 
plainly, to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection or reinfection in the first 
place. Masking, especially in high-risk places258 (for example, health-
care settings), is important—along with isolation guidelines and sick 
leave policies that permit people with infection to recuperate at home, 
thereby diminishing the probability of transmission and reducing the 
risk of long COVID45.
Although vaccines may reduce the risk of long COVID, vaccine 
policies in much of the world restrict vaccine availability to high-risk 
groups. These policies consider risks of death and hospitalization in 
the acute phase (which are manifest primarily in older adults and those 
with comorbidities) and ignore the risk of long COVID. Adding to these 
policy challenges are the low rates of vaccine uptake in 2023–2024
with comorbidities) and ignore the risk of long COVID. Adding to these 
policy challenges are the low rates of vaccine uptake in 2023–2024 
among eligible populations259. Vaccine policies must consider the risk 
of long COVID, as well as the risk of hospitalization and death during 
the acute phase of SARS-CoV-2 infection; and strategies to improve 
vaccine uptake (for example, pairing the COVID-19 vaccine with the 
annual influenza vaccine and other approaches) should be utilized to 
achieve wider vaccine coverage and greater protection to populations.
Because SARS-CoV-2 is likely to remain for decades to come, it is 
important to develop long-term, sustainable prevention solutions. 
Airborne transmission risk assessment tools, such as the one developed 
by the World Health Organization (WHO), help inform risk reduction 
strategies260. Ventilation and air filtration systems can play a major role 
in reducing the risk of infection with airborne pathogens261. Calls have 
been made for mandatory improved air quality standards for public 
spaces and policies that would support design and equipment of homes 
to meet these standards261. Investment in infrastructure supporting 
improved indoor air quality will help reduce the risk of SARS-CoV-2 
transmission and other airborne pathogens and will ensure greater 
resilience against future threats from airborne pathogens262. Amelio-
ration of indoor air quality also has the added benefit of reducing risk 
of health effects due to indoor air pollutants263–265, thereby improving 
human health, well-being, productivity and learning 261,262,266. Invest-
ment in vaccine technologies to develop more durable, variant-proof 
vaccines that are not rendered ineffective by ongoing mutations of 
the SARS-CoV-2 virus are important. Vaccine technologies that induce 
strong mucosal immunity to block SARS-CoV-2 infection and transmis-
sion are also needed267.
Supporting people with long COVID.  Because of the considerable 
impacts of long COVID on people’s ability to work and care for them-
selves, it is imperative that an adequate response to the long COVID 
crisis involves ensuring people have the financial, physical and emo-
tional support132. Streamlining of disability benefit processes, as well 
as increased access to home and community-based services and food 
and cash assistance is critical. Workplace policies that support individu-
als with long COVID could include flexible working hours, increased 
breaks to allow for pacing, the option for remote work, and sick leave 
policies. Funding should be provided to support patient groups and 
community-based organizations, which can provide and connect 
people to critical supports and services.
Access, quality and equity of care. Governments must work to build 
and expand access to long COVID care, in particular for marginal -
ized communities (for example, rural and indigenous communities). 
Improving access to care may take various forms in different countries, 
depending on the structure of the healthcare system and the involve-
ment of national and local governments in financially supporting 
healthcare services. Adequate coverage of long COVID treatments and 
rehabilitation services by insurance providers is requisite. Develop -
ment of quality-of-care metrics for long COVID and policies to monitor 
and incentivize quality of care should be pursued121. As diagnostics and 
treatments are developed, governments must also ensure equitable 
access. Shining historical examples include the Brazilian National AIDS 
Program, which was established in 1996 in response to the HIV/AIDS 
crisis to ensure free and universal provision of antiretroviral drugs268,269, 
and the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program (based in the United States), 
which provides outpatient HIV care, treatment and support services 
to those without health insurance and fills gaps in coverage and cost 
for those with insurance limitations270–272.
Professional education and training.  Currently, very few medical 
schools and health professional training programs include in their 
curricula any meaningful training about identification and clinical 
management of infection-associated chronic conditions, including 
long COVID. A survey of physicians in the United States showed that 
78% agree that long COVID is a problem but only about one-quarter 
feel prepared to address it273. Training of healthcare professionals to
78% agree that long COVID is a problem but only about one-quarter 
feel prepared to address it273. Training of healthcare professionals to 
recognize and manage long COVID effectively must be prioritized. 
This includes embedding up-to-date information on long COVID and 
infection-associated chronic conditions into training curricula for 
health professions, as well as providing regular high-quality continuing 
education to qualified health providers.
Public health communication. Existing public health education on 
long COVID has been minimal. A survey in the United States showed 
that one-third of American adults still had not heard of long COVID as 
of August 2023 (ref. 274), and there remains very low awareness of long 
COVID in low- and middle-income countries. Through public education 
campaigns, governments must raise awareness about long COVID and 
the risk of chronic conditions after infection; combat social stigma 
across adults and children; and use a harm reduction framework to 
promote awareness of prevention measures (including vaccination, 
masking and improved indoor air quality)258,260,261.
Supporting coordinated interdisciplinary research.  T o achieve 
the research priorities listed above, governments must substan -
tially increase the amount of funding toward research. In the 
United States, existing calls for the establishment of a center for 
infection-associated chronic conditions at the US National Institutes 
of Health—with a funding request of at least $1 billion per year toward 
long COVID research and with additional substantial funding for other 
infection-associated chronic conditions—should be vigorously sup -
ported275. This proposal would create a coordinating entity to lead a 
long-term, large-scale interdisciplinary research portfolio to address 
long COVID research priorities. Other governments should also explore  
similar proposals.
Policies supporting research should explicitly mandate meaning-
ful patient engagement in research from inception to implementation, 
and should leverage existing expertise (including scientific, clini -
cal and lived experience) in infection-associated chronic conditions. 
Furthermore, meaningful efforts must be made to expand the pool of 
researchers working on infection-associated chronic conditions, by 
encouraging early career scientists and clinician–researchers to focus 
on these conditions and providing resources to current experts to lead 
training and research.
Given the complexity of long COVID and its similarities to other 
infection-associated chronic conditions, a coordinated approach that 
integrates research, policy and regulatory efforts across these condi-
tions would reduce duplication of efforts and allow a more compre-
hensive understanding of the common underlying mechanisms, trial 
designs and potential treatment strategies.
Policies from funders are needed to mandate meaningful data 
sharing, which will maximize the utility and pooled insights that can 
be generated from existing health information. Current open data 
protocols are insufficient, laden with bureaucratic hurdles and do 
not allow access to primary data, and consequently do not enable 
meaningful analyses. Funders must establish data banks (a pioneering 
exemplar of this is the UK Biobank) for the collection, storage, analysis, 
retrieval and dissemination of data to make long COVID research more 
accessible in near real time, all while upholding data privacy and data 
security standards276,277.
Building consensus on definitions and clinical endpoints for long 
COVID. Various interim definitions of long COVID exist 39,278–283, but 
there is not yet a universal consensus on the most optimal definition—
which must be sufficiently nuanced to capture the complexity of the 
condition and its various manifestations. It is unlikely that a single 
definition will fit all needs. Consensus definitions that are optimized
condition and its various manifestations. It is unlikely that a single 
definition will fit all needs. Consensus definitions that are optimized 
and empirically tested for various applications, including clinical care, 
epidemiological surveillance, and research, should be developed. 
Definitions must necessarily evolve to incorporate new understanding 
as the evidence base for long COVID grows.
Similarly, developing consensus on clinical endpoints for trials of 
long COVID is needed. Drug regulatory agencies in consultation with 
stakeholders, including patients and scientists, should lead in this arena 
and provide regulatory guidance on clinical endpoints for trials. These 
endpoints will also have to necessarily evolve as our understanding of 
long COVID expands.
Building consensus on definitions and clinical endpoints would 
catalyze progress in this field, remove barriers to entry for the phar -
maceutical industry into long COVID trials and facilitate comparative 
analyses across studies.
Global coordination. The global nature of long COVID necessitates 
international cooperation in both research and policy. International 
bodies (for example, the WHO) should facilitate partnership and  
collaboration among countries across the globe. This collaboration 
is pivotal to coordinate and synergize efforts across the globe and 
accelerate progress on the different challenges posed by long COVID.
Professional societies for long COVID. Professional societies (national 
and global) should be established for long COVID. Because of the mul-
tisystemic nature of long COVID (and the other infection-associated 
chronic conditions), it does not fit neatly under any of the traditional 
organ-based organizational structures of medical care and research284, 
hence the need for professional home(s) for long COVID and associated 
conditions. Dedicated professional societies could provide strategic 
leadership and guidance in the clinical management of long COVID 
and associated conditions284. They could serve as hubs to coordinate 
education, research and advocacy efforts284. These professional soci-
eties could play a major role in organizing and hosting national and 
international conferences, spearheading efforts to provide periodic 
synthesis of evidence that distills existing research into actionable 
insights guiding care of people with long COVID. The newly established 
Clinical Post COVID Society in the United Kingdom may be a promising 
example of this284.
Preparedness for the next pandemic . We must reflect on our col -
lective experience with COVID-19 to enhance resilience and prepar-
edness for future pandemics 285–287. A major lesson learned from long 
COVID is that pandemics leave in their wake a long tail of disease 
and disability 198. This is not unique to the COVID-19 pandemic 198; 
historical accounts show similar phenomena following previous 
pandemics198,199,255. Due to climate change, deforestation, human 
encroachment on animal habitat, increased frequency of travel, a 
growing livestock industry and other anthropogenic factors, the 
risk of zoonotic spillover and novel viral sharing among species is 
likely higher in the twenty-first century than it was in the twentieth 
century 286,288–292. Many of the geographic areas that are most prone 
to these changes are also projected to have high population density—
creating ripe conditions for pandemics 289,291. Future pandemics are 
likely to also produce long-term disability and disease198. Investment 
in systems to measure the population-level incidence and prevalence 
of post-acute and chronic disease caused by infectious agents, includ-
ing SARS-CoV-2, will aid in the characterization of the epidemiology 
of long COVID and will position us to be better prepared to deal with 
post-acute and chronic illnesses that will emerge in future pandemics. 
Incorporating the potential emergence of long-term health effects 
into initiatives for pandemic preparedness and resilience (for exam -
ple, the WHO Preparedness and Resilience for Emerging Threats Initia-
tive) is essential to optimize response to the long-term consequences 
of future pandemics.
Conclusions
Considerable progress has been made in the past several years in 
characterizing the epidemiology, clinical course and biology of long 
COVID. But much remains to be done. The scale of long COVID and its 
far-reaching impacts necessitate a robust and coordinated research 
and policy response strategy. Addressing the research and care needs 
of people impacted by long COVID will have broad benefits, potentially
and policy response strategy. Addressing the research and care needs 
of people impacted by long COVID will have broad benefits, potentially 
unlocking a better understanding of infection-associated chronic ill-
nesses (an ignored area for decades) and optimizing our preparedness 
for the next pandemic.
