A Long COVID Definition
A Chronic, Systemic Disease State with Profound Consequences

Summary

Individuals infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), can experience ongoing symptoms after acute infection. This complex and lingering disease state known as Long COVID has profound medical, social, and economic consequences worldwide. Long COVID prevalence estimates vary widely, and some estimates of the percentage of those infected with COVID-19 who develop Long COVID range from 10 to 35 percent or higher. For example, a U.S. Census Bureau and the National Center for Health Statistics Household Pulse Survey showed, as of March 5 to April 1, 2024, about 17.6 percent of all U.S. adults have “ever experienced with Long COVID” and 6.9 percent of all U.S. adults are “currently experiencing Long COVID.”

Several working definitions that describe Long COVID exist currently. However, no common definition for Long COVID has yet been agreed upon. In August 2022, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health (OASH) published an interim working definition for Long COVID based on collaboration among several government agencies and outside subject matter experts, including medical societies and patients. Other major health organizations in the United States and internationally have also published various definitions of Long COVID and related terms. Furthermore, several journal articles have proposed different ways in which Long COVID could be defined. The lack of a consensus definition presents challenges for patients, clinicians, public health practitioners, researchers, and policy makers. The diversity of Long COVID patient presentations, the overlap with other conditions, and the difficulty of ascribing symptoms to an earlier infection make defining Long COVID particularly challenging. For patients, challenges associated with the diversity of clinical presentations that can accompany a diagnosis of Long COVID may lead to difficulties accessing medical care and obtaining support; skepticism and dismissal of their experiences by medical professionals, peers, family members, and employers; delayed or denied treatment; and social stigma.

Recognizing the need for broad input and careful consideration of an improved definition, the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response (ASPR) and OASH asked the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine (National Academies) Standing Committee on Emerging Infectious Diseases and 21st Century Health Threats to take up the issue of defining Long COVID. To accomplish this complex task, a separate expert committee, the Committee on Examining the Working Definition of Long COVID, was established. The committee consisted of experts in the fields of health research and policy, research related to Long COVID and chronic multi-symptom illness, clinical practice and guidelines, infectious diseases, public health and epidemiology practice, social and behavioral sciences, patients and lived experience, and community engagement and health equity.

To define Long COVID, the committee employed a systematic approach implemented through a multi-phase process with activities engaging more than 1,300 participants, with a focus on the patient perspective and interdisciplinary dialogue. The committee also assembled and analyzed reviews and primary literature on Long COVID and examined existing Long COVID definitions. In developing the definition, the committee considered the following criteria: precision, feasibility, acceptability, accessibility, balancing benefits and harms, potential impact on health equity, and unintended consequences.

2024 NASEM LONG COVID DEFINITION

Relying on findings reported in the literature as well as input from engagement activities, the committee proposes the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition. The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition consists of a core component in bold font, plus a set of illustrative symptoms and diagnosable conditions, followed by seven important features that elaborate on the core component. The committee chose to put forth a single definition for Long COVID. This definition is intended to cover most, if not all patients who experience Long COVID. The committee recognizes that eligible subsets who fit within the overall definition would need to be specified for particular purposes, such as research or surveillance.

The committee intends its definition to be applied to many purposes. These may include clinical care and diagnosis; eligibility for health services, insurance coverage, disability benefits, and school or workplace accommodations; public health; social services; policy making; epidemiology and surveillance; private and public research; and public awareness and education, especially for patients and their families and caregivers. In all these situations, the committee intends its Long COVID definition to interface with existing practices and policies without worsening health disparities or other problems.

In its report, the committee specifically offers ways in which the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition may be applied for clinical, research, and public health surveillance purposes and provides considerations as well as illustrative examples. Furthermore, the committee believes all stakeholders involved in social safety net programs, including but not limited to payers, workplaces and employers, academic institutions and educators, and support services and government, need to be aware of Long COVID to properly support patients, and their families and caregivers in need. In this regard, the committee refers the reader to the National Academies report, Long-Term Health Effects Stemming from COVID-19 and Implications for Social Security Administration.

The committee hopes that the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition will aid clinicians in the consistent diagnosis, documentation, and treatment of Long COVID; encourage further research into the pathophysiology, diagnosis, prognosis, consequences, and treatment of Long COVID; enhance patient access to appropriate care, treatment, services, and benefits; and harmonize research and surveillance efforts on Long COVID, while providing researchers flexibility in the design of studies on Long COVID; and raise awareness and educate the public about Long COVID.

KEY ELEMENTS OF THE DEFINITION

The committee found no published, standardized guidelines for developing disease definitions. The committee gleaned lessons from the process of developing disease definitions for other multi-symptom conditions and took advantage of existing definitions for Long COVID, adopting elements when appropriate. The committee articulated several possible key elements of a disease definition: attribution, time, clinical features, equity, functional impairment, exclusions and alternative diagnoses, biomarkers and laboratory criteria, and risk factors. Below is a description of how the committee approached each key element of the definition.

The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition includes a few notable features and specifically introduces a few new features that existing definitions lack. It provides explicit examples of common symptoms and conditions that are characteristic of Long COVID. The definition requires symptoms or conditions to be present for a duration of 3 months or more. Notably, while symptoms need to be present for at least 3 months, the timing of those 3 months is unspecified. The definition also firmly acknowledges the profound impact of Long COVID on function and the ability of patients to work, attend school, take care of family, and care of themselves. The new definition also introduces an equity statement—“Long COVID can affect children and adults, regardless of health, disability, or socioeconomic status, age, sex, gender, or sexual orientation, race, ethnicity, or geographic location”—recognizing that social determinants and structural inequalities intersect to create health disparities and to discourage stereotypical assumptions and biases that could deflect patients, clinicians, public health practitioners, researchers, and policy makers from recognizing all those who experience Long COVID. The definition does not require laboratory confirmation or other proof of initial SARS-CoV-2 infection, recognizing that the initial infection may or may not have been recognized due to various factors, including the lack of availability of and limited access to tests early in the pandemic, limited sensitivity of some SARS-CoV-2 tests and the potential for false negatives, as well as financial barriers to testing even when tests were more widely available.

Terminology Considerations
Using consistent terminology is as important as using a consistent definition. In medicine, the word “illness” often refers to the “innately human experience of symptoms and suffering,” while the term “disease” often refers to an “alteration in biological structure or functioning.” To stress the systemic reality of Long COVID, while acknowledging uncertainty about etiology, this report adopts the term “disease state” when referring to Long COVID. In addition to using “disease state” when referring to Long COVID, the committee uses the terms “condition,”“medical condition,” or “chronic condition.” Similarly, when referring to the unhealthy state related to any prior infection, the committee uses the term “infection-associated chronic condition.” The term “infection-associated chronic condition” (IACC) applies to a variety of chronic conditions that can be triggered by viruses, bacteria, fungi, or parasites. Use of this term highlights the ongoing nature of the medical condition and its association with a triggering infection without conveying any unwarranted conclusions about pathobiological mechanisms.

Over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, various terms have been applied to what this report terms “Long COVID.” These include “long-haul COVID,” “post-COVID conditions,” “post-COVID syndrome,” “post-acute COVID-19 syndrome,” “chronic COVID,” and “post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC).” All these terms pertain to the same broad clinical condition. The committee intentionally adopted the patient-developed term “Long COVID” because its simplicity and familiarity can facilitate communication within and between the scientific community and the public. Long COVID is also consistent with World Health Organization recommendations to adopt unbiased, neutral, non-stigmatizing descriptive terms when the cause, mechanism, or pathology of a new condition have not yet been established.

Attribution to Infection
The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition states that Long COVID occurs after acute SARS-CoV-2 infection but does not require laboratory confirmation or other proof of initial infection. The definition emphasizes that Long COVID can follow infections of any severity (including asymptomatic infections), whether they were initially recognized or not. Because no test for SARS-CoV-2 infection has perfect sensitivity and because the rates of false negatives from antigen and PCR tests vary with time and other factors, some infected individuals will receive negative test results. Antibody testing can sometimes indicate a past SARS-CoV-2 infection, but antibody levels can fluctuate or wane over time. Vaccination against COVID-19 also complicates antibody testing as it can cause positive results on some antibody tests. Additionally, some individuals were not tested or could not access testing during a suspected acute SARS-CoV-2 infection. Individuals experiencing an asymptomatic infection may not be tested for SARS-CoV-2, yet a variety of post-acute sequelae can occur after asymptomatic or mild infections.

Onset and Duration
The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition specifies 3 months as the minimum duration of symptoms, which means that 3 months after infection, whether consistent or relapsing and remitting, is the earliest that symptoms can be designated as Long COVID. Although the definition specifies a minimum duration of 3 months to qualify as Long COVID, a clinician should recognize, acknowledge, and monitor concerning symptoms before the 3-month mark. These symptoms should be assessed and treated appropriately, and the ICD-10 code U09.9 (post COVID-19 condition, unspecified) may be used even before establishing a Long COVID diagnosis. Most patients with acute SARS-CoV-2 infection recover after a period of days to weeks. A 3-month cutoff will likely provide enough time for most patients to recover from acute manifestations of COVID-19. The choice of a 3-month minimum duration may allow for the resolution of temporary symptoms that are due to non-medical circumstances (e.g., overwork, stressful situations, medication side effects) and may allow for evaluation and treatment for alternative conditions with similar initial presentations.

Because there is still ambiguity regarding the relationship between the timing of SARS-CoV-2 infection relative to Long COVID onset, the committee chose not to include a maximum latency period. Although this action may lead to an increase in the number of people diagnosed with Long COVID, any maximum latency chosen would be speculation without the backing of scientific evidence. Furthermore, such a move might exclude people who develop delayed onset Long COVID, did not recognize they might be affected by Long COVID until later in its course, or were not able to access care due to the availability or restrictive criteria of some Long COVID clinics.

At the same time, none of the symptoms or conditions associated with Long COVID are unique to that condition. As the number of cases of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection declines, an increasing fraction of patients with symptoms compatible with Long COVID will have their condition due to a different origin. The report suggests that by 2025, it will be prudent for the clinician considering a diagnosis of Long COVID to seek evidence of prior acute SARS-CoV-2 infection. Over time, if and as the time horizon for Long COVID following acute infection becomes more sharply defined, this will be an important aid to clinical judgment.

Symptoms, Temporal Pattern and Duration of Symptoms, and Symptom Severity
The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition does not list any symptoms or conditions as being required and does not list any symptoms or conditions as being exclusionary; this may have the effect of lessening the specificity while increasing the sensitivity of the diagnosis. The committee offered some examples of how Long COVID could manifest, including some symptoms and conditions, and how Long COVID could present as a new condition or an exacerbation of pre-existing conditions. This list is not meant to be exhaustive or to dismiss the significance of other symptoms or conditions. Studies estimate the prevalence of over 200 symptoms in multiple organ systems, and these symptoms can occur at varying frequencies. Another notable feature of Long COVID is the variable temporal pattern and duration of symptoms. The committee also recognizes that the severity of Long COVID symptoms can range from mild to severe.

Equity
Equity needs to be considered at multiple steps in a Long COVID patient’s journey to obtain care and services. Findings from the engagement process emphasized the need to address equity in the definition, with one participant saying, “It could be helpful to include a specific statement around health equity in a Long COVID definition. That would maybe be a little unusual to include in a definition, but it is important, if not in the definition, somewhere else.” The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition acknowledges that a Long COVID diagnosis may be considered regardless of health status, vaccination history, or demographics. This definition applies to both adult and pediatric patients. Socioeconomic factors, inequality, discrimination (based on race and gender, among others), bias, and stigma affect whether patients can receive a diagnosis and benefit from Long COVID-targeted health care or services. These factors include but are not limited to access to COVID-19 testing during acute illness, access to evaluation for possible Long COVID, willingness of physicians to diagnose a particular patient, access to insurance benefits, and patients’ fears of stigmatization that could result from having a Long COVID diagnosis. No existing Long COVID definitions include references to equity.

Functional Impairment
The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition emphasizes that some individuals with Long COVID are severely affected and can have a variety of activity limitations. This can profoundly affect patients’ and caregivers’ lives and is an important feature of Long COVID. In the evidence review, the committee found publications documenting a range of mild to severe functional impairments, activity limitations, and quality of life impacts in individuals with Long COVID.

Alternative Diagnosis, Biomarkers, and Risk Factors
Consideration of alternative diagnoses is not directly addressed in the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition, and risk factors are not included. As an important consideration, the definition notes that no definitive biomarkers currently exist to determine the presence of Long COVID. The committee elected not to include a statement regarding exclusions or alternative diagnoses in the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition. There is no scientific evidence that any medical condition precludes the diagnose of or cannot exist alongside Long COVID. The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition does note myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS), among others, as examples of diagnosable conditions that can be part of the picture of Long COVID. These and other potentially overlapping conditions are compatible with a diagnosis of Long COVID. While risk factors, such as underlying comorbid conditions, may influence the probability and presentation of COVID-19 and of Long COVID, the proposed definition does not directly consider the potential for differential risk according to patient characteristics.

A WORKING DEFINITION AND RESEARCH AGENDA
The committee believes that the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition should be revised as new evidence emerges and our understanding of Long COVID continues to evolve. This is in line with lessons from defining other diseases such as HIV/AIDS, which took years and multiple iterations to refine. Given the current pace of research, it is possible that the definition may need to be updated in no more than 3 years’ time and will continue to require a multidisciplinary effort. Other triggers for updating the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition could include the emergence of new treatments with clear benefits for patients identified as a subset of people with Long COVID, the development of a new test, new evidence on prognosis, or other opportunities to improve the clarity or precision of the definition.

Looking ahead, it may also be valuable to have mechanisms in place for gauging how the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition is understood, how it is being used, what other elements need to be added, and whether it is being applied in a consistent and standardized way (e.g., assessment tools). A research agenda centered around improving the definition could focus on the key definition elements articulated in the report: attribution to infection, time, clinical features, equity, functional impairment, exclusions and alternative diagnoses, biomarkers and laboratory criteria, and risk factors.

New evidence of the following may play a role in decisions to reconsider the definition:
- Improved testing to identify those who have been infected, even when tested weeks, months and years later. However, a large proportion of the population has been infected with COVID-19 at this point, and, as a result, finding uninfected control groups will become an increasing challenge in conducting research.
- Symptoms and organ damage that distinguish Long COVID from healthy people and other medical conditions.
- Onset and duration, including delayed onset of Long COVID after an ostensible period of recovery from acute infection.
- Recovery trajectory and natural history over longer periods of time.
- Presence and prevalence of co-morbid conditions.
- Biomarker(s) to diagnose Long COVID.
- Risk factors for Long COVID.
- Prevalence and outcomes of Long COVID by sex, gender, race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and other factors.
- Patterns in Long COVID among special populations such as older adults; children and adolescents; pregnant, lactating, and postpartum persons; people with disabilities; people experiencing homelessness; tribal communities; and imprisoned populations; among others.
- Longitudinal consequences (e.g., risk and development of other diseases, disability, hospitalization, and death).
- Effects on functionality and daily living, overall well-being, and caregivers and families.
- Social sciences research aimed at understanding the social and economic consequences of Long COVID.
- New treatment and management options that could potentially affect the sensitivity threshold and elements of the definition.

CONCLUDING REMARKS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The committee confronted many difficulties in its efforts to define Long COVID—most prominently the challenge of balancing risks of false negative and false positive classification. By putting forth the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition, the committee hopes patients, clinicians, public health practitioners, researchers, and policy makers will be better equipped to cope with this continually unfolding health crisis. The committee also hopes to foster greater awareness, understanding, and support for those with Long COVID. To conclude, the committee recommends three actions about the adoption, implementation, and updating of the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition.

Recommendations
RECOMMENDATION 1. Adopt and Implement the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition.
The federal government, state, tribal, local, and territorial health authorities; clinical societies and associations; public health practitioners; clinicians; payers; researchers; drug industry; employers; educators; international organizations; and patients should adopt the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition and should use the term Long COVID. The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition is intended to be applied to many purposes, but the committee notes that there is flexibility within the broad definition, for example, to restrict research eligibility to a subset of Long COVID patients.

RECOMMENDATION 2. Promulgate and Monitor the Implementation of the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health’s Office of Long COVID Research and Practice and the Long COVID Coordination Council should lead the coordination and collaboration efforts across federal, state, tribal, local, and territorial agencies and other relevant entities, including international organizations, in the wide dissemination and implementation of the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition. Such implementation efforts should:
- Give special attention to the definition’s equity implications to maximize appropriate inclusion.
- Develop standardized communication for key stakeholders and the public about the revised definition and understanding of Long COVID.
- Empirically test the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition; monitor, evaluate, and identify barriers to implementation and adoption of the definition in research and in practice (including supporting an individual’s ability to apply for and receive Social Security disability benefits) that may be improved in future revisions.
- Develop a standard protocol for screening and diagnosing patients with Long COVID in clinical settings and enhance clinical education and training on infection-associated chronic conditions.
- Catalogue and summarize the application of the definition in research settings and identify sub-phenotypes of Long COVID that inform the need for further investigation across the translational research spectrum from discovery to delivery science.
- Take advantage of a unique opportunity to learn from epidemiologic surveillance of an infection-associated chronic condition and support, for example, improved data infrastructure, technologic and legal support for more efficient cross-jurisdictional information-sharing, and improved test types and access to testing.

RECOMMENDATION 3. Update the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition.
In no more than 3 years or when triggered by the emergence of relevant new knowledge, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health’s Office of Long COVID Research and Practice should convene a multi-disciplinary group, including individuals with lived experience, to reexamine and update the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition set forth in this report. The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health’s Office of Long COVID Research and Practice should put into place the necessary infrastructure, policies, and mechanisms to support and prepare for future updates to the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition, including a process to track and assess new scientific knowledge that may inform the definition.

Introduction

Since the onset of the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic, millions of individuals across the globe have experienced ongoing symptoms following infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The long-term health effects of COVID-19, known as Long COVID, are profound. This complex and lingering medical condition has exposed shortcomings in public health messaging and education, clinical care, research, and social support services. It has also illustrated the need to better understand infection-associated chronic conditions (IACCs) more broadly, both to improve care for those who currently live with IACCs and to prepare for and respond to future pandemics. Research results and available information on Long COVID have varied, in part because of the heterogeneous definitions used in research and clinical practice. A uniform, core definition could help patients, clinicians, public health practitioners, researchers, and policymakers understand and navigate Long COVID more effectively.

PREVALENCE OF LONG COVID GLOBALLY AND IN THE UNITED STATES

Long COVID is a serious global issue with medical, social, and economic impacts. Prevalence estimates vary widely. One reason for this variation is the absence of a clear-cut diagnostic biomarker or other definitive diagnostic criterion that would distinguish those with Long COVID from those whose condition is due to other reasons. In the wake of the pandemic, Long COVID has likely been underdiagnosed and misdiagnosed, with Long COVID patients reporting not being believed in clinical settings. Variation in prevalence estimates is compounded by the absence of a consistent definition for Long COVID and variety of terminologies to label the medical condition. Estimates of prevalence depend on how Long COVID is defined in terms of presence, timing, severity of symptoms, laboratory and imaging results, documentation of prior SARS-CoV-2 infection, and background frequency of common symptoms, among other factors.

Estimates of the percentage of those infected with SARS-CoV-2 who develop Long COVID range from 10 to 35 percent or higher. Based on a prevalence of 10 percent of those infected, Davis and colleagues conservatively estimate that at least 65 million people worldwide have experienced Long COVID. A U.S. Census Bureau and the National Center for Health Statistics Household Pulse Survey showed, as of March 5 to April 1, 2024, about 17.6 percent of all U.S. adults have “ever experienced with Long COVID” and 6.9 percent of all U.S. adults are “currently experiencing Long COVID.” The Pulse Survey defined Long COVID as “any symptoms lasting 3 months or longer that [they] did not have prior to having coronavirus or COVID-19.” Another recent publication in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report reported that the prevalence of Long COVID varied among the states and territories, ranging from 1.9 percent in the Virgin Islands to 10.6 percent in West Virginia.

In the United States, according to death certificate data in the National Vital Statistics System (NVSS), Long COVID (or related terms) was an “underlying or contributing cause” of 3,544 deaths between January 2020 and June 2022. With the addition of preliminary data from 2023, estimates now suggest over 5,000 deaths have been attributed to Long COVID since the start of the pandemic. The age-adjusted death rate was higher among men (7.3 per million) than women (5.5 per million), higher among those 85 years and older (117.1 per million) than among younger age groups, and higher among American Indian and Alaska Native (AIAN) people (14.8 per million) than among other racial and ethnic groups. Long COVID as an underlying or contributing cause of death is likely to be underestimated in the references studies as an ICD-10 code did not exist earlier in the pandemic and it has been underused.

NEED FOR A CLEAR DEFINITION

Defining Long COVID is challenging because of the heterogeneous nature of long-term sequelae of COVID-19, which include a wide array of symptoms and conditions with potentially variable etiologies and potential overlap with other causes. Adding to the challenge, the clinical and scientific understanding of Long COVID is evolving as new evidence emerges on the presentations, durations, and pathogenesis of Long COVID and on its relationships to other conditions.

The complexities of Long COVID and the methodologic problems associated with studying Long COVID indicate the need for a comprehensive approach to evaluating and defining this disease state. Despite Long COVID’s relatively recent emergence, numerous definitions and descriptions of Long COVID have already been published. However, a review of 295 research studies on Long COVID, all published before October 26, 2022, found high heterogeneity in existing definitions; this heterogeneity limits opportunities to compare interventions and accumulate evidence on Long COVID. Currently, the field does not conform to a single definition of Long COVID and does not evaluate the disease state in a consistent way.

The lack of a generally accepted and consistent definition for Long COVID presents challenges for clinical management and treatment, research, surveillance, and support services. For patients, challenges associated with the lack of a clear, consistent definition of Long COVID and the diversity of the range of clinical presentations and poor understanding of Long COVID can lead to: difficulties accessing medical care; skepticism and dismissal of patients’ experiences by medical professionals, peers, family members, and employers; delay or denial of treatment; stigma; and difficulty obtaining support. An improved definition can help with raising awareness—according to a Pew Research Center survey conducted among 10,133 adults in February 2024, 22 percent of Americans say they haven’t heard of Long COVID, and 50 percent of Americans think that it is extremely or very important for researchers and clinicians to understand and treat Long COVID.

In August 2022, OASH published an interim working definition for Long COVID based on collaboration among several government agencies and outside subject matter experts, including medical societies and patients (HHS, 2022). Other major health organizations in the United States and 
internationally have also published various definitions of Long COVID and 
related terms, and these can be useful starting points (Box 1). Furthermore, 
several journal articles have proposed different ways in which Long COVID 
could be defined (Alwan and Johnson, 2021; Baig, 2021; Chaichana et 
al., 2023; Fernández-de-Las-Peñas, 2022; Fernandez-de-Las-Peñas et al., 
2021a; Haslam et al., 2023; Lippi et al., 2023; Monika et al., 2023; Pan 
and Pareek, 2023; Rando et al., 2021; Raveendran, 2021). In developing 
its definition, the committee took advantage of these existing definitions by 
reviewing definitions in the context of the literature and available data and 
then adopting elements where appropriate. 

Selected Existing Long COVID Definitions and Descriptions 

Office of Assistant Secretary for Health (OASH)
Long COVID is broadly defined as signs, symptoms, and conditions that  
continue or develop after initial COVID-19 or SARS-CoV-2 infection. The  
signs, symptoms, and conditions are present 4 weeks or more after the initial 
phase of infection; may be multisystemic; and may present with a relapsing–  
remitting pattern and progression or worsening over time, with the possibility  
of severe and life-threatening events even months or years after infection.  
Long COVID is not one condition. It represents many potentially overlapping  
entities, likely with different biological causes and different sets of risk factors 
and outcomes (HHS, 2022). 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
CDC references the OASH Long COVID definition, but also says: Long  
COVID is a wide range of new, returning, or ongoing health problems that  
people experience after being infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.  
Most people with COVID-19 get better within a few days to a few weeks after 
infection, so at least 4 weeks after infection is the start of when Long COVID  
could first  be identified.  Anyone who was  infected can experience Long  
COVID. Most people with Long COVID experienced symptoms days after  
first learning they had COVID-19, but some people who later experienced  
Long COVID did not know when they got infected  (CDC, 2023b). (Note that  
this is not a formal definition but rather a description on the CDC website.) 

National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Recovery from infection with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19,  
can vary from person to person. Most patients seem to recover quickly and  
completely, while others report symptoms that persist for weeks or even  
months  after  the acute phase of  illness  has  passed (a condition often referred 
to as “Long COVID”). In other cases, new symptoms and findings emerge  
after the acute infection, including when the acute phase was asymptomatic.  
Collectively, these long-term effects of the virus are called post-acute se-
quelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC) (NIH, 2024). (Note that this is not 
a formal definition but rather a description on the NIH RECOVER website.) 

World Health Organization (WHO)—Adults
Post-COVID-19 condition occurs in individuals with a history of probable  
or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, usually 3 months from the onset, with  
symptoms that last for at least 2 months and cannot be explained by an alter-
native diagnosis. Common symptoms include, but are not limited to, fatigue, 
shortness of breath, and cognitive dysfunction and generally have an impact  
on everyday functioning. Symptoms might be new onset following initial  
recovery from an acute COVID-19 episode or persist from the initial illness.  
Symptoms might also fluctuate or relapse over time (Soriano et al., 2022).

World Health Organization (WHO)—Pediatrics
Post COVID-19 condition in children and adolescents occurs in individuals  
with a history of confirmed or probable SARS-CoV-2 infection, when expe-
riencing symptoms lasting at least 2 months which initially occurred within 
3 months of acute COVID-19. Current evidence suggests that symptoms  
more frequently reported in children and adolescents with post-COVID-19  
condition compared with controls are fatigue, altered smell (anosmia), and  
anxiety. Other symptoms have also been reported. Symptoms generally have 
an impact on everyday functioning such as changes in eating habits, physical 
activity, behavior, academic performance, social functions (interactions with  
friends, peers, family) and developmental milestones. Symptoms may be new 
onset following initial recovery from an acute COVID-19 episode or persist  
from the initial illness. They may also fluctuate or relapse over time. Workup  
may reveal additional diagnoses, but this does not exclude the diagnosis of  
post COVID-19 condition (WHO, 2023). 

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), Scottish In-
tercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN), and Royal College of General 
Practitioners (RCGP)
Ongoing symptomatic COVID-19: Signs and symptoms of COVID‑19 from  
4 weeks up to 12 weeks. Post-COVID-19 syndrome: Signs and symptoms  
that develop during or after an infection consistent with COVID‑ 19 continue  
for more than 12 weeks and are not explained by an alternative diagnosis.  
It usually presents with clusters of symptoms, often overlapping, which  
can fluctuate and change over time and can affect any system in the body.  
Post‑COVID‑19 syndrome may be considered before 12 weeks while the  
possibility of an alternative underlying disease is also being assessed. In  
addition to the clinical case definitions, the term “long COVID” is commonly  
used to describe signs and symptoms that continue or develop after acute  
COVID‑19. It includes both ongoing symptomatic COVID‑ 19 (from 4 to 12  
weeks) and post‑COVID‑19 syndrome (12 weeks or more) (NICE et al., 2022). 

Global List of Long COVID Definitions
In addition to the above definitions, many organizations and governments 
across the globe have developed definitions for Long COVID and related  
terms. In March 2023, a list of Long COVID definitions was crowdsourced  
from members of the EpiCore network around the world (EpiCore, 2023). 

Reimbursement Codes 
In addition to Long COVID definitions,  reimbursement  codes have been  
developed. In the United States, ICD-10 code U09.9 designates “post-CO-
VID-19 condition, unspecified” and became available in October 2021 (Pfaff 
et al., 2023). In the UK, the National Health Service (NHS) has developed  
codes that align with the NICE/SIGN/RCGP  definition (NICE et al., 2022)

CHARGE TO THE COMMITTEE 
Recognizing the desirability of broad input and careful consideration 
of an improved definition, the Administration for Strategic Preparedness 
and Response (ASPR) and the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health 
(OASH) asked the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medi­
cine Standing Committee on Emerging Infectious Diseases and 21st Century 
Health Threats3 (standing committee) to take up the issue of defining Long 
COVID. To accomplish this complex task (see Box 2), a separate expert 
committee, the Committee on Examining the Working Definition of Long 
COVID (committee), was established. Members and their backgrounds are 
described in Appendix C. 

Statement of Task
 
A National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine com-
mittee will conduct a series of public workshops to examine the current  
U.S. government (USG) working definition for Long COVID and related  
technical terms. The workshop series will consist of several sessions  
designed to: 
•	 Explore literature on definitions for Long COVID in the United
States, including but not limited to, definitions that are cur-
rently used for clinical care, research, surveillance, and health
communication; 
•	 Learn about challenges and barriers due to currently available
definitions for Long COVID; and 
•	 Seek input from various stakeholder groups relating to refine-
ment, dissemination, and implementation of a definition for Long
COVID. 
The workshop series will conclude with a 2-day workshop discussing  
potential considerations for refined Long COVID definitions, terminology, 
and harmonizing efforts for patient engagement, clinical care, research,  
surveillance, across USG and relevant stakeholders. The committee will  
define the specific topics to be addressed, develop the workshop agen-
das, and select and invite speakers and other participants.  
Building on the workshop series, the committee will integrate and syn-
thesize information from the stakeholder engagement and information 
gathering and produce a letter report that will:  
•	 Review additional evidence for definitions of Long COVID; 
•	 Consider efforts that have already been completed on this topic 
area; 
•	 Recommend new definitions for Long COVID and related techni-
cal terms, with descriptions of the circumstances under which
these new definitions and terminology should be adopted. 
The committee will make recommendations to establish considerations 
for maintaining an up-to-date definition for Long COVID and related
technical terms.


STUDY APPROACH 
The committee’s charge was to recommend a new definition for Long 
COVID. To this end, the committee employed a systematic approach imple­
mented through a multi-phase process (see Figure 1). Appendix A provides 
a detailed methodology of the committee’s approach, including details on 
the engagement process, evidence review, and public meetings. 
In the 2-month scoping phase, the standing committee held three infor­
mation-gathering meetings to discuss the key issues and identify the areas 
of expertise and stakeholders to engage in this effort. 
In Phase I, the committee, along with National Academies staff and a 
team of consultants, engaged patients and individuals across multiple sec­
tors to solicit input from a wide range of interested and affected parties 
through a series of focus group discussions and an online questionnaire; 
3 To learn more about the Standing Committee on Emerging Infectious Diseases and 21st 
Century Health Threats, please visit https://www.nationalacademies.org/our-work/standing­
committee-on-emerging-infectious-diseases-and-21st-century-health-threats.
both activities were offered in English and Spanish. More than 1,300 people 
participated in these activities, including patients and caregivers, public 
health and health care professionals, researchers, policy and advocacy pro­
fessionals, payors, health care business professionals, and members of the 
public. One consistent theme throughout the engagement process was that 
the National Academies committee should listen and learn from those with 
lived experiences of Long COVID, including patients and their families and 
caregivers, and those who diagnose, treat, and study Long COVID. For 
example, one participant said, “Listen to the people who have been expe­
riencing the disease, but also to people who will need to use the definition 
in their work.”
 Details on who participated in these activities (demographics and 
sector/group affiliation) and the key findings are published in a publicly 
available report titled What We Heard: Engagement Report on the 
Working Definition for Long COVID.4 Engagement activities were publicly 
promoted through various mechanisms and networks, and the committee 
made focused efforts to identify an equitable list of participants that 
covered the full spectrum of impacted and interested people, geographies, 
and demographics. Demographic data was only formally collected for 
questionnaire respondents, and of those respondents who answered the 
demographic questions, they were overwhelmingly white, female, highly 
educated, living in urban or mostly urban areas of the United States, and 
had a total household income of at least $100,000. The committee notes 
this limited presence of underrepresented groups in its engagement efforts 
and emphasizes the importance of attention to recruitment methods and 
broader access in future efforts. 
During Phase I, the committee also organized three information-gath­
ering virtual meetings, created an online public portal to receive public 
comments, and held a 2-day hybrid symposium to review and discuss input 
gathered. Recognizing the limited presence of underrepresented groups 
in its structured engagement efforts, the committee made a special effort, 
including direct outreach to organizations that serve underrepresented pop­
ulations, to engage with these groups in its information-gathering meetings 
and symposium. 
In Phase II, the committee undertook activities to further build, 
prioritize, and synthesize the evidence to help inform development of the 
refined definition. A scoping review consisting of 116 reviews pertinent to 
the diagnosis of Long COVID was carried out along with an examination of 
the primary literature. The committee also held four additional committee 
meetings, three in closed session and one public meeting. 
The committee developed its definition based on the best evidence to 
date and all of the above-listed sources of information. While responsive 
to outside needs, concerns, and preferences, the committee recognized that 
different groups have varied desires and interests and examined ideas and 
suggestions in the context of the available scientific evidence. 
Stakeholders in the Long COVID Community and Report Audiences 
As mentioned previously, central to the committee’s approach was 
soliciting input from a wide range of sources and groups in developing the 
refined definition. The audience for this report includes federal agencies 
such as the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) agen­
cies and offices, National Institute of Health (NIH), Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC), and the U.S. Department of Social Security 
Administration (SSA); Long COVID patients, organizations, and groups; 
medical institutions and health care providers; public health agencies and 
practitioners; academic institutions, researchers, and educators; payers and 
health care business professionals; employers and human resource profes­
sionals; and international agencies. This report includes guidance for clini­
cians, researchers, and public health practitioners in applying the proposed 
definition. The committee hopes this refined definition will prove useful to 
ongoing federal programs and initiatives on Long COVID (see Figure 2). 

Study Scope 

As specified in the statement of task for this study (see Box 2), the committee was asked to develop a definition for Long COVID. The committee recognizes the many conditions that are infection-associated in addition to Long COVID, but the committee was not asked to define or address the challenges in identifying, researching, or treating these other conditions. The committee worked to identify the best available evidence and information to refine the definition for Long COVID. The report offers a framework for applying the definition in specific use cases, including for clinical care, research, and public health, recognizing that it may be advantageous to apply additional criteria to identify a subpopulation within the definition who are best suited to the particular purpose. 

A Note on Terminology 

Using consistent terminology is as important as using a consistent definition. In medicine, the word “illness” often refers to the “innately human experience of symptoms and suffering,” while the term “disease” often refers to an “alteration in biological structure or functioning” (Kleinman, 1988). To stress the systemic reality of Long COVID, while acknowledging uncertainty about etiology, this report adopts the term “disease state” when referring to Long COVID. 

The words “illness” and “medical condition” both refer to an unhealthy state. To some, the word “illness” may connote a more established and serious experience of ill health. To others, including many experiencing Long COVID, “condition” or “medical condition” connotes a more lasting and serious unhealthy state. In addition to using “disease state” when referring to Long COVID, the committee uses the terms “condition,” “medical condition,” or “chronic condition.” Similarly, when referring to the unhealthy state related to any prior infection, the committee uses the term “infection-associated chronic condition.” 

The term “infection-associated chronic condition” (IACC) applies to a variety of chronic conditions that can be triggered by viruses, bacteria, fungi, or parasites (CDC Foundation, 2024). While this term may be somewhat new, the conditions are not. Millions of Americans were living with IACCs prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. Use of this term highlights the ongoing nature of the medical condition and its association with a triggering infection without conveying any unwarranted conclusions about pathobiological mechanisms. Furthermore, the use of this collective term can promote alignment across diverse disease groups and patient organizations—allowing for the identification of common objectives, challenges, opportunities, and actionable steps. IACCs include conditions triggered by infections such as Epstein-Barr, influenza, chikungunya, West Nile, Ebola, SARS, HIV, HPV, and MERS viruses (Choutka et al., 2022; Rando et al., 2021; Vivaldi et al., 2023). Conditions with a proposed non-viral infectious trigger include Q fever fatigue syndrome, tick- and vector-borne IACCs such as Lyme-associated chronic illnesses, and multiple chronic symptoms following Giardia infection (Choutka et al., 2022). Although there are variations linked to the particular infectious agent, many of these conditions share common symptoms such as fatigue, exertion intolerance, cognitive impairment, musculoskeletal pain, dysautonomia, and sleep problems, which can appear in a relapsing/remitting pattern and can resemble or overlap with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) (Choutka et al., 2022). Other researchers are considering possible similarities with chronic inflammation and immune activation seen in people living with HIV, where the persistence of the virus or viral components may be a contributing factor (Bonilla et al., 2023). Recognizing Long COVID as one of a group of IACCs could potentially facilitate research and the development of clinical indicators for better diagnosis (Kim et al., 2023). None of the pre-existing definitions the committee reviewed mention IACCs. 

Over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, various terms have also been applied to what this report terms “Long COVID.” These include “long-haul COVID,” “post-COVID conditions,” “post-COVID syndrome,” “post-acute COVID-19 syndrome,” “chronic COVID,” and “post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC).” All these terms pertain to the same broad clinical condition (Turner et al., 2023). The committee intentionally adopted the patient-developed term, “Long COVID,” because its simplicity and familiarity can facilitate communication within and between the scientific community and the public. One participant said, “Patients need to be able to understand it and see themselves in the definition, because they may need to advocate for themselves or their loved ones for initial care (or continued care or recognition).” 

The use of the term “Long COVID” is also consistent with WHO recommendations to adopt unbiased, neutral, non-stigmatizing descriptive terms when cause, mechanism, and pathology of a new condition have not yet been established (WHO, 2015). While similarly neutral, the term PASC can imply a sharper virologic or symptomatic differentiation between “acute” and “post-acute” stages than is often the case (Munblit et al., 2022). 

Report Structure 

The report is organized to reflect the study’s approach and key priority areas for refining and implementing the working definition of Long COVID, as identified by the committee and statement of task. The report contains seven sections, the first of which is the above introduction and discussion of the background for the study (1). This is followed by a section and figure outlining the refined definition developed by the committee (2). The definition has a core component in bold font, plus a set of illustrative symptoms and diagnosable conditions, followed by seven important features that elaborate on the core component. The next section summarizes evidence supporting key elements and features of the definition (3), including such aspects as balancing errors of inclusion and exclusion, attribution to infection, onset and duration, symptoms and clinical expression, functional impact, considerations of equity, alternative diagnoses, biomarkers, and risk factors. The implementation use-cases section (4) outlines frameworks for applying the definition for multiple purposes, specifically clinical care, research, and public health surveillance applications. This is followed by a section discussing the need and parameters for updating the definition as evidence accumulates and understanding evolves (5). This section also identifies priority areas for future research to improve the definition. The report goes on to describe key limitations, prominently including limitations imposed by the available knowledge about and understanding of Long COVID (6). The final section (7) includes the committee’s concluding remarks and three recommendations. 


2024 NASEM LONG COVID DEFINITION 
Long COVID (LC) is an infection-associated chronic condition (IACC) that 
occurs after SARS-CoV-2 infection and is present for at least 3 months as a 
continuous, relapsing and remitting, or progressive disease state that affects 
one or more organ systems. 
LC manifests in multiple ways. A complete enumeration of possible signs, 
symptoms, and diagnosable conditions of LC would have hundreds of 
entries. Any organ system can be involved, and LC patients can present with 
•	 single or multiple symptoms, such as shortness of breath, cough, 
persistent fatigue, post-exertional malaise, difficulty concentrating, 
memory changes, recurring headache, lightheadedness, fast heart 
rate, sleep disturbance, problems with taste or smell, bloating, 
constipation, and diarrhea. 
•	 single or multiple diagnosable conditions, such as interstitial lung 
disease and hypoxemia, cardiovascular disease and arrhythmias, 
cognitive impairment, mood disorders, anxiety, migraine, stroke, 
blood clots, chronic kidney disease, postural orthostatic tachycar
 dia syndrome (POTS) and other forms of dysautonomia, myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS), mast cell 
activation syndrome (MCAS), fibromyalgia, connective tissue dis
 orders, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, and autoimmune disorders such 
as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, and Sjogren’s syndrome. 
Important Features of LC: 
•	 LC can follow asymptomatic, mild, or severe SARS-CoV-2 infection. 
Previous infections may have been recognized or unrecognized. 
•	 LC can be continuous from the time of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection 
or can be delayed in onset for weeks or months following what had 
appeared to be full recovery from acute infection. 
•	 LC can affect children and adults, regardless of health, disability, 
or socioeconomic status, age, sex, gender, sexual orientation, race, 
ethnicity, or geographic location. 
•	 LC can exacerbate pre-existing health conditions or present as new 
conditions. 
•	 LC can range from mild to severe. It can resolve over a period of 
months or can persist for months or years. 
•	 LC can be diagnosed on clinical grounds. No biomarker currently 
available demonstrates conclusively the presence of LC. 
•	 LC can impair individuals’ ability to work, attend school, take care 
of family, and care for themselves. It can have a profound emotional 
and physical impact on patients and their families and caregivers. 


Defining Long COVID 

A DEFINITION DESIGNED TO EVOLVE AS NEW EVIDENCE AND UNDERSTANDING EMERGE 

Evidence on the different presentations of Long COVID continues to emerge as the clinical and scientific understandings of Long COVID deepen. Because of this dynamic, the definition of Long COVID is expected to evolve, and the version described should be considered the “2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition.” At this stage of understanding Long COVID, no definition can ensure that every affected individual will be correctly classified and that no others will be wrongly included. The 2024 NASEM Long COVID definition can only go as far as current science and evidence permit. With new evidence and better scientific understanding accumulating over time, the definition of Long COVID can and should be improved. 

Relying on findings reported in the literature as well as on the engagement process, the committee proposed the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition. This definition identifies Long COVID as an infection-associated chronic condition (IACC), specifies a minimum duration of 3 months, and expressly incorporates common symptoms and diagnosable conditions characteristic of Long COVID. The bolded “Core Definition” is designed to be accurate and inclusive; the “Important Features” provide context and highlight notable aspects of Long COVID. 

The committee hopes that this definition will: 

- Aid clinicians in the consistent diagnosis, documentation, and treatment of Long COVID. 
- Encourage further research into the pathophysiology, diagnosis, prognosis, consequences, and treatment of Long COVID. 
- Enhance patient access to appropriate care, treatment, services, and benefits. 
- Harmonize research and surveillance efforts on Long COVID, while providing researchers flexibility in the design of studies on Long COVID. 
- Raise awareness and educate the public and policy makers about Long COVID. 

Balancing Risks of False Negative and False Positive Classification 

Throughout its deliberations, the committee grappled with two contending objectives: to ensure that patients who experience Long COVID will be included in the definition and to avoid wrongly including patients whose conditions are not related to prior SARS-CoV-2 infection. This is a familiar dilemma in any diagnostic challenge, to balance the risks of false negative and false positive classification. The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition is intentionally inclusive, to satisfy the first objective. The committee acknowledges the potential for false positives with the definition. The committee believes the patient’s treating clinician is best poised to strike the right balance between avoiding a false positive and a false negative classification. 

All the symptoms and concomitant diagnosable conditions that are characteristic of Long COVID existed before the COVID-19 pandemic, and none are specific to Long COVID. What makes the case for association between symptoms and Long COVID is the temporal relation to the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic that may be documented as clinical findings or through patient self-report. The lack of biomarkers with high sensitivity and specificity for Long COVID is a major knowledge gap. As discussed later in this report, studies are underway to examine possible biomarkers for Long COVID, though none is yet dispositive for the disease state. Biomarkers may reinforce, or help exclude, a diagnosis of Long COVID, reducing the risk of false positives. Also discussed later is evidence for risk factors for developing Long COVID. As with any diagnosis, risk factors can be helpful in the clinical assessment of the probability of disease in any individual patient. 

The definition does not require documentation of prior infection. Based on antibody surveys, more than three quarters of adult Americans had evidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection by the end of 2022, and it is reasonable to estimate that 80–90 percent of all adult Americans were infected at least once between 2020 and the end of 2023 (CDC, 2024b). 

In assessing a patient’s condition and reaching a diagnosis, the clinician must take account of all aspects of a patient’s history, symptoms, and signs, and test findings against the background of different disease probabilities. A clinician may need to overcome language, cultural, or educational barriers, and it may be difficult to elicit a complete and reliable history in patients who have experienced medical trauma or have cognitive impairment. It is incumbent on the clinician to consider alternative explanations of a patient’s presentation and to balance the risks of false inclusion and of false exclusion in reaching any possible diagnosis. 

A later section elaborates on applying the definition in clinical care, along with applications for research and for public health surveillance, and Appendix B defines key terms in the measurement of diagnostic performance. 

A Single Definition 

The committee chose to put forth one broad definition for Long COVID that could apply to adults and children. Findings from the committee’s engagement process indicate a desire for consistency between how Long COVID is defined in adults and children. An inclusive definition that sets appropriate boundary conditions (such as the minimum duration of symptoms) is designed to promote coordination among different audiences and purposes. For example, the results of research are more relevant when the study participants involved are like those identified in clinical practice. Public surveillance data can better inform disability policy when subjects of the former are defined similarly to those attempting to access benefits. Such a definition also helps ensure that compensation programs for loss of work or disability reflect the entirety of those affected by this chronic medical condition. 

The committee sought to find balance between a single definition and the need to operationalize it for different purposes. Findings from the committee’s engagement emphasize that the definition should encompass most, if not all, patients who are affected. More broadly, the committee sought to craft a definition usable in a variety of ways and for a range of purposes. In the final section of this report, the committee discusses how the definition can be applied to specific use cases. For example, as research and surveillance strive to answer many of the unknowns surrounding Long COVID, specific inclusion or exclusion criteria may be necessary to achieve the purposes of the particular study or surveillance. 

The Value Proposition for this Definition 

The committee’s central charge was to put forth a refined definition for Long COVID that lays the foundation for increased scientific understanding of the disease state and for better diagnosis and treatment of patients. The definition presented here includes a few notable features and specifically introduces a few new features that existing definitions lack. 

The new definition provides explicit examples of common symptoms and conditions that are characteristic of Long COVID. Educating clinicians about common symptoms can improve the accuracy and speed of Long COVID diagnosis. Recognizing diagnosable conditions allows for the treatment of the specific conditions and communicates that these disorders are part of Long COVID. The definition reinforces divergent course patterns by describing the ongoing disease state as continuous, relapsing and remitting, or progressive. 

The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition requires symptoms or conditions to be present for a duration of 3 months or longer. Notably, while symptoms need to be present for at least 3 months, the timing of those 3 months is unspecified. In particular, it is not necessary for symptoms to be experienced continuously from the time of the acute infection. The committee notes that this 3-month period allows for the spontaneous resolution of symptoms, evaluation for other diagnoses that might explain symptoms, and possible therapeutic trials to clarify the diagnosis. Although the definition specifies a minimum duration of 3 months to qualify as Long COVID, a clinician should recognize, acknowledge, and monitor concerning symptoms before the 3-month mark. These symptoms should be assessed and treated appropriately, and the ICD-10 code U09.9 (post COVID-19 condition, unspecified) may be used even before establishing a Long COVID diagnosis. 

The committee developed this definition with equity in mind to recognize that social determinants and structural inequalities intersect to create health disparities (HHS, 2020) and to discourage stereotypical assumptions and biases that could prevent patients, clinicians, public health practitioners, researchers, and policy makers from recognizing all those who experience Long COVID. For example, a stereotypical assumption about conditions like Long COVID, which often present with more symptoms than definitive clinical signs, is that they are more common among affluent, highly educated white women. Such assumptions might deflect clinicians from recognizing that persons of color or young men might potentially have Long COVID. Considering this, one of the definition’s important features is “Long COVID can affect children and adults, regardless of health, disability, or socioeconomic status, age, sex, gender, sexual orientation, race, ethnicity, or geographic location.” Risk factors, per se, do not play a direct part in the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition, though they are relevant to differential diagnosis, and a later section of this report summarizes current evidence about risk factors. 

The definition does not require laboratory confirmation or other proof of initial infection. The initial infection may or may not have been recognized, in part due to the lack of availability of and limited access to tests early in the pandemic, limited sensitivity of some SARS-CoV-2 tests and the potential for false negatives, and an overall decline in testing rates later in the pandemic. However, the symptoms and diagnosable conditions characteristic of Long COVID can have alternative origins. If and as the background frequency of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection diminishes, as discussed earlier, other sources will likely become responsible for a growing proportion of cases. The probability that a particular clinical case is attributable to SARS-CoV-2 will be increased when there is evidence of prior, acute infection, or multiple infections, with that virus. 

The definition firmly acknowledges the profound impact of Long COVID on function, and this has serious implications for the provision of services, accommodations, and benefits to patients. 

EVIDENCE SUPPORTING KEY ELEMENTS OF THE DEFINITION 

The committee found no published, standardized guidelines for the development of disease definitions (Doust et al., 2017). The committee gleaned lessons from the process of developing and modifying definitions for other multi-symptom conditions such as ME/CFS and Gulf War Syndrome (IOM, 2014, 2015). As a first step in the committee’s process, the committee articulated several possible key elements of a disease definition (Table 1). These key elements served as a framework for the committee as it developed and refined the definition of Long COVID. In the following section, the committee describes how the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition approaches each key element and provides a summary of the evidence from the scoping review and primary literature and also provides a summary of the findings from the engagement of multiple groups in support of its decisions. 

In addition to the above key elements, the committee considered other foundational criteria in its deliberations. These foundational criteria are multi-factorial, layered, and interacting, and they were informed by many different frameworks and checklists (Doust et al., 2017; Moberg et al., 2018; NASEM, 2020). Those foundational criteria were: 

- Precision: A precise definition should be repeatable (agree in identical conditions), reproducible (agree across comparable conditions), and accurate (specific and sensitive). 
- Feasibility: The definition must be reliably translated into operational terms for multiple different purposes and should be adaptable to a range of possible circumstances. The definition should consider the impact on resource usage. 
- Acceptability: The definition should take account of stakeholders’ values and preferences. 
- Accessibility: The definition must be easily and equally well understood and applied by diverse stakeholders. 
- Balancing benefits and harms: The definition should be guided by a balanced assessment of the anticipated benefits and harms, using the best available evidence, and considering both the individual and societal level. 
- Potential impact on health equity: The definition should be equitable and should not perpetuate discrimination or inequities. The definition should also be perceived as equitable by socioeconomically, racially, culturally, and educationally minoritized groups and by those who have distinct historical experiences with the health system. 
- Unintended consequences: The definition should consider potential for misuse, effect on measured incidence, changes to the apparent natural history of disease, suboptimal treatment of patients, psychological and financial consequences, and other adverse effects on individuals and society. 

TABLE 1 Possible Key Elements of a Disease Definition 

Attribution: Source responsible for causing the disease  
Time: Onset of disease 
Clinical Features: Symptoms, symptom course and duration, and  
symptom severity of the disease to be defined  
Equity: Identify persons affected and consider equity implications  
Functional Impairment: Effect of the disease on daily activities 
Exclusions/Alternative Diagnoses: Consideration of alternative diagnoses 
Biomarkers and Laboratory Criteria: Objective tests (e.g., blood tests, neuroimaging,  
cognitive batteries) that help identify the disease 
Risk Factors: Characteristics associated with a higher probability of  
disease or adverse outcome

How Does the Definition Address Attribution to Infection? 

Definition: occurs after SARS-CoV-2 infection 

Important Features: LC can follow asymptomatic, mild, or severe SARS-CoV-2 infection. Previous infections may have been recognized or unrecognized. 

Linking symptoms to a confirmed or suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection may be desirable in a Long COVID definition to reduce the risk of misdiagnosis of other conditions as Long COVID. However, the reality is that some, if not many, SARS-CoV-2 infections have gone unrecognized throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition states that Long COVID occurs after acute SARS-CoV-2 infection but does not require laboratory confirmation or other proof of initial infection. The definition emphasizes that Long COVID can follow infections of any severity (including asymptomatic infections), whether they were initially recognized or not. 

Findings from both the engagement process and the evidence review highlighted the large number of SARS-CoV-2 infections, both throughout the pandemic and currently, that are not captured by testing and/or are not recorded in patients’ medical records. Combined with the lack of a specific and sensitive test that can detect a past SARS-CoV-2 infection (e.g. antibody testing), this supports the committee’s decision not to require laboratory evidence or formal diagnosis of an initial SARS-CoV-2 infection as part of the definition of Long COVID. Requiring such evidence would likely lead to underdiagnosis and raises equity issues. This aspect of the NASEM 2024 Long COVID definition is in accord with prior definitions the committee reviewed, none of which require laboratory evidence or formal diagnosis of infection. The evidence review also highlighted the challenges of attributing research study participants’ symptoms and manifestations to SARS-CoV-2 infection; this task is likely to become more difficult as the population of never-infected individuals available for control groups decreases. 

Findings from the Evidence Review 

Because no test for SARS-CoV-2 infection has perfect sensitivity and because the rates of false negatives on antigen and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests vary with time and other factors, some infected individuals will receive negative test results. For example, median real-time PCR (RT-PCR) false negative rates vary from 38 percent on the first day of symptoms to 20 percent at day 3 after symptom onset and to 66 percent on day 21 (Davis et al., 2021; Dinnes et al., 2022; Kucirka et al., 2020). In addition to the possibility of false negatives on testing, some individuals were not tested or could not access testing during a suspected acute SARS-CoV-2 infection. Individuals experiencing an asymptomatic infection may not be tested for SARS-CoV-2, yet a variety of sequelae can occur after asymptomatic infections (Ma et al., 2023) or mild infections (Malkova et al., 2021). Individuals with an unrecognized or unconfirmed initial infection (including, potentially, those with a false negative test) can still develop Long COVID. A team at Northwestern Medicine investigated 61 patients with neurological symptoms linked to a suspected post-viral condition. They found no substantial difference in the average number of symptoms or the subjective perception of recovery between those who had a positive test for SARS-CoV-2 (n=32) and those without a positive SARS-CoV-2 test but who were found to have evidence of humoral or cellular SARS-CoV-2-specific immune responses during investigation (n=12) (Orban et al., 2023). 

Because of these limitations, some clinicians and researchers have sought other ways to link ongoing symptoms to a possible past infection. Antibody testing can sometimes indicate a past SARS-CoV-2 infection, but antibody levels can fluctuate or wane over time. Vaccination against COVID-19 complicates antibody testing as it can cause positive results on some antibody tests (Fogh et al., 2022). Furthermore, the trajectories of antibody concentrations over time appear to differ between women and men after SARS-CoV-2 infection, and some research suggests that the sensitivity of antibody testing may be lower in women and may differ among age groups (Korte et al., 2021; Vashisht et al., 2021). 

Attributing symptoms to a previous SARS-CoV-2 infection in a research study is a separate issue from attributing a particular patient’s symptoms to a previous infection in clinical care. However, over time, the former may inform the latter. Sensitivity may be prioritized in diagnosis, while specificity may be prioritized in research. The inclusion of an uninfected control group in studies can be helpful in distinguishing manifestations specifically related to COVID-19 from those resulting from other causes. For example, one systematic review and meta-analysis with seven observational studies, including studies in adult and pediatric populations, found an increased risk of newly diagnosed diabetes mellitus in individuals with a past SARS-CoV-2 infection compared with uninfected individuals and compared with those with a past severity-matched influenza infection (Banerjee et al., 2022). Another systematic review and meta-analysis with over 20 million patients found an increased risk of acute myocarditis in individuals in their first year after confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection compared with control subjects (Zuin et al., 2022). 

A 2022 systematic review and meta-analysis of studies on Long COVID in children and adolescents (<19 years of age) by Behnood and colleagues highlights the need for high-quality data. Based on their analysis of five controlled studies, the only symptoms significantly more prevalent in cases than in controls were loss of smell (8 percent more), headaches (5 percent), cognitive difficulties (3 percent), sore throat (2 percent), and sore eyes (2 percent). Meanwhile, reported symptom prevalence was much higher in the 17 uncontrolled studies, and higher study quality was associated with lower prevalence of symptoms, except for smell loss and cognitive problems. The authors point out that including control or comparison groups in studies can help researchers distinguish symptoms resulting from SARS-CoV-2 infection from those resulting from other factors, such as background symptoms and concurrent social changes during the pandemic (Behnood et al., 2022). But control group comparisons also have limitations in knowing for certain that those in control groups do not have unrecognized prior SARS-CoV-2 infections. An evidence-mapping study based on a search conducted in November 2021 found that only 15 percent of 565 included studies on Long COVID had a control group; this may be a limitation of the current evidence base (Franco et al., 2022). Researchers may face rising challenges in including control or comparison groups in studies as the percentage of the U.S. and global populations with no history of SARS-CoV-2 infection continues to shrink. 

Findings from the Engagement Process 

Participants suggested that requiring laboratory confirmation of SARS-CoV-2 infection would be too exclusive and observed that numerous individuals never received a laboratory confirmation of SARS-CoV-2 from a medical professional. Therefore, requiring a laboratory confirmation of a SARS-CoV-2 infection may result in barriers to health coverage or benefits. Regarding access to testing, a focus group participant said, “A lot of marginalized people didn’t have access to testing, and a lot of people in city centers got infected very early in the pandemic when testing was not available. That includes some of our poorest citizens.” Phrases such as “probable COVID-19” or “suspected COVID-19” were supported in the definition to foster inclusivity. Some suggested that a patient-centered definition that attributes infection according to the patient’s lived experience would be more appropriate. 

Lessons from Existing Definitions 

The existing Long COVID definitions considered in this report do not mention whether a patient ever had a positive COVID-19 test. The WHO Adult and WHO Pediatric definitions state that Long COVID may follow “probable” or “confirmed” SARS-CoV-2 infection, and the NICE definition uses the phrase “during or after an infection consistent with COVID-19.” The CDC and NIH definitions acknowledge the possibility of Long COVID developing after an asymptomatic or unrecognized acute infection. 

How Does the Definition Address Onset and Duration? 

Definition: is present for at least 3 months 

Important Features: LC can be continuous from the time of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection or can be delayed in onset for weeks or months following what had appeared to be full recovery from acute infection. 

One of the most important elements that the committee wanted to clarify is the timeframe used in a definition for Long COVID. A Long COVID definition may address the minimum or maximum time after the onset of initial COVID symptoms that a medical condition can be designated as Long COVID as well as the minimum duration of symptoms needed to qualify for a Long COVID diagnosis. Precision with time course and duration may be an opportunity to create a more meaningful, specific definition of Long COVID that can prevent the misdiagnosis of patients who have continuing symptoms from a pre-existing illness or symptoms from a new-onset, unrelated illness. Decisions regarding duration and latency time can also affect eligibility for care, reimbursement, or benefits. 

From the engagement process, the committee determined that 4 weeks of symptoms was likely too short to be defined as Long COVID, because in many cases, SARS-CoV-2-related symptoms that persist for 4 weeks will resolve shortly thereafter. The current evidence base regarding symptom resolution trajectories has limitations, but the literature review generally suggests many people have symptoms that resolve in a matter of weeks, while the smaller group of individuals with symptoms that last at least 3 months have a higher chance of persistent symptoms to at least 1 year. Both the evidence review and the engagement process highlighted that some individuals have onset of symptoms that is delayed by weeks or months after an apparent recovery from initial infection, although the frequency of delayed onset is unclear. Because there is still ambiguity regarding the relationship between the timing of SARS-CoV-2 infection relative to Long COVID onset, the committee chose not to include a maximum latency period. Although this action may lead to an increase in the number of people diagnosed with Long COVID, any maximum latency chosen would be speculation without the backing of scientific evidence. Furthermore, such a move might exclude people who develop delayed onset Long COVID, did not recognize they might be affected by Long COVID until later in its course, or were not able to access care due to the availability or restrictive criteria of some Long COVID clinics. Additionally, research into delayed onset Long COVID or the long-term consequences of Long COVID might be discouraged were an artificial cut-off time established. The committee anticipates that as more knowledge is gained about Long COVID, methods (e.g. biomarkers for Long COVID) will emerge to help distinguish Long COVID from other conditions regardless of latency time. 

The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition specifies 3 months as the minimum duration of symptoms, which means that 3 months after infection, whether consistent or relapsing and remitting, is the earliest that symptoms can be designated as Long COVID. In cases with delayed onset, the minimum 3-month duration would still apply but could begin at any time. Some individuals may present with persistent symptoms linked to COVID-19 before 3 months have elapsed; the ICD general code U09.9 (post COVID-19 condition, unspecified) is available for these patients. The committee would like to emphasize that individual symptoms or diagnosable conditions should be recognized and treated regardless of whether 3 months have elapsed. 

Findings from the Evidence Review 

Most patients with acute SARS-CoV-2 infection recover after a period of days to weeks. A 3-month cutoff will likely provide enough time for most patients to recover from acute manifestations of COVID-19. The Global Burden of Disease Long COVID Collaborators conducted an observational analysis of 1.2 million people in 22 countries, using data from 54 studies plus two medical record databases. Considering three Long COVID symptom clusters (persistent fatigue with bodily pain or mood swings, ongoing respiratory problems, cognitive problems), the authors estimated that 6.2 percent of individuals with a history of symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection had one or more of these symptom clusters at 3 months post-infection (Wulf Hanson et al., 2022). Among 10 studies analyzed within a systematic review on Long COVID prevalence and manifestations, the prevalence of failure to recover full health and fitness by 12 weeks after infection ranged from 8 percent to 70 percent, with a pooled estimate of 34.5 percent (prediction interval, 4.3–85.9 percent) (Woodrow et al., 2023). The choice of a 3-month minimum duration may allow for the resolution of temporary symptoms that are due to non-medical circumstances (e.g., overwork, stressful situations, medication side effects) or due to medical conditions other than COVID-19. A 3-month cutoff may also allow for evaluation and treatment for alternative conditions with similar initial presentations. 

Another factor that influenced the committee’s decision to choose a 3-month duration is that several primary studies suggest that people who have symptoms that persist for several months may have a high chance of still having symptoms at 1 year after infection. Among a cohort of unvaccinated adults randomly sampled from all confirmed wild-type SARS-CoV-2 infections in Zurich, Switzerland (which had mandatory reporting) (n=1,106), 72.9 percent of the infected reported that they had recovered fully within 3 months, including 55.3 percent within 1 month and 17.6 percent between 1 and 3 months post-infection. Meanwhile, 27.1 percent, 22.9 percent, and 18.5 percent of the infected individuals said they had not fully recovered at 3, 6, and 12 months, respectively, meaning that 4.2 percent of patients experienced recovery between 3 and 6 months and 4.4 percent between 6 and 12 months (Ballouz et al., 2023). An analysis of the ComPaRe Long COVID cohort found that 85 percent of patients who were experiencing symptoms at 2 months were still experiencing symptoms at 12 months after infection. The limitations of this study include the lack of an uninfected comparison group and the possibility that patients with more symptoms were recruited (Tran et al., 2022). 

Delayed onset of Long COVID symptoms after apparent recovery from acute COVID-19 has been reported. In a survey-based, 7-month international study of individuals with confirmed or suspected Long COVID, some respondents reported recovery from symptoms within the first 4 weeks to 2 months of their initial illness followed by a relapse or the appearance of new symptoms in months 3, 4, or 5. However, this pattern was uncommon within the study population (Davis et al., 2021). 

Findings from the Engagement Process 

Participants indicated that the disease’s onset should be included in the definition; however, there were varying opinions on the specific approach to include such information. One participant said, “The time frame is critical. I think 4 weeks is too short. WHO uses 3 months after the initial SARS-CoV-2 infection, with these symptoms lasting for at least 2 months with no other explanation. I think this is much better.” Furthermore, participants raised the duration of Long COVID as an important but ambiguous topic that should be addressed in the definition. Many noted that Long COVID may manifest in different ways and last different lengths of times, and yet it is unknown whether Long COVID symptoms will persist indefinitely. Participants emphasized the importance of including the relapsing and remitting nature of Long COVID symptoms. One participant said, “There are people for whom acute symptoms fade, and they have a period of wellness and then their long-term symptoms arise several months after the original acute infection. It’s not the most common pattern, but it is common enough that we keep seeing it, and I am not sure that the current timelines accommodate that.” 

Lessons from Existing Definitions 

The WHO Adult definition states that Long COVID symptoms usually appear 3 months after initial infection, and the WHO Pediatrics definition includes a maximum latency time, stating that Long COVID symptoms initially occur “within 3 months of acute COVID-19.” Both the WHO Adult and the WHO Pediatric definitions state that symptoms must last “at least 2 months” to be designated Long COVID. By contrast, the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition requires symptoms or manifestations to persist for at least 3 months and does not give a maximum latency time, instead recognizing that Long COVID can first appear weeks or months after an apparent recovery. 

The U.S. definitions either reference 4 weeks (OASH and CDC) after infection as the earliest that Long COVID can be identified or do not give a specific earliest time point (NIH). 

Patients experiencing symptoms 3–6 weeks or 4–12 weeks after infection may or may not develop illness that persists beyond that point. It may be desirable to accommodate patients seeking treatment before 3 months have elapsed while acknowledging the uncertainty over individual patients’ future course of symptoms. Of the existing definitions covered here, only the NICE definition separates patients into two temporal subsets: signs and symptoms occurring between 4 and 12 weeks are “ongoing symptomatic COVID-19,” and signs and symptoms that last beyond 12 weeks are “post-COVID-19 syndrome.” According to NICE, both subsets can be considered Long COVID. The NICE definition also states, “Post‑COVID‑19 syndrome may be considered before 12 weeks while the possibility of an alternative underlying disease is also being assessed.” 

How Does the Definition Address Symptoms, Temporal Pattern and Duration of Symptoms, and Symptom Severity? 

Definition: continuous, relapsing and remitting, or progressive disease state that affects one or more organ systems. 

LC manifests in multiple ways. A complete enumeration of possible signs, symptoms, and diagnosable conditions of LC would have hundreds of entries. Any organ system can be involved, and LC patients can present with 

- single or multiple symptoms, such as shortness of breath, cough, persistent fatigue, post-exertional malaise, difficulty concentrating, memory changes, recurring headache, lightheadedness, fast heart rate, sleep disturbance, problems with taste or smell, bloating, constipation, and diarrhea. 
- single or multiple diagnosable conditions, such as interstitial lung disease and hypoxemia, cardiovascular disease and arrhythmias, cognitive impairment, mood disorders, anxiety, migraine, stroke, blood clots, chronic kidney disease, postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) and other forms of dysautonomia, myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS), mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS), fibromyalgia, connective tissue diseases, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, and autoimmune disorders such as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, and Sjogren’s syndrome. 

Important Features: LC can range from mild to severe. It can resolve over a period of months or can persist for months or years. LC can exacerbate pre-existing health conditions or present as a new condition. 

The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition does not list any symptoms or conditions as required and does not list any symptoms or conditions as exclusionary; this may have the effect of lessening the specificity while increasing the sensitivity of the diagnosis. The symptoms and conditions listed in the definition are chosen to be representative of the hundreds of symptoms currently identified in the Long COVID population to date, but the intent was not to downgrade other symptoms. A complete enumeration of signs, symptoms, and diagnosable conditions of Long COVID would have more than 200 entries. For example, one study estimated the prevalence of 203 symptoms in multiple organ systems (systemic, neuropsychiatric, reproductive, cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, immunological, head/ear/eye/nose/throat, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and dermatologic) (Davis et al., 2021). Furthermore, Long COVID may present differently in different individuals, and a single set of illustrative symptoms cannot precisely capture all presentations of Long COVID. 

Not every delayed consequence of acute SARS-CoV-2 will satisfy the definition of Long COVID. For example, chronic impairment of cardiac function could satisfy the definition’s criterion of persistence for at least 3 months. However, an elevated incidence of acute myocardial infarction in the year following acute SARS-CoV-2 infection, as reported by Xie et al., 2022, would not meet the 3-month persistence criterion. Such delayed, acute events, although attributable to prior SARS-CoV-2 infection, would not in themselves qualify as Long COVID in accordance with the proposed definition. 

In reviewing the evidence for Long COVID symptoms, the committee reviewed a large and diverse evidence base describing and investigating new symptoms and manifestations of Long COVID in different organ systems. The committee also reviewed studies indicating exacerbation of pre-existing conditions. The process of narrowing down a list of hundreds of reported signs, symptoms, and diagnosable conditions identified in the evidence review was challenging. In selecting the illustrative symptoms and diagnosable conditions, the committee considered prevalence data from the evidence and the engagement process. In future iterations of the Long COVID definition, it may be desirable to enlist specific inclusion criteria for the illustrative symptoms, such as a threshold frequency of their occurrence among patients and specificity to Long COVID. Multiple studies reported variable severity and variable time courses of symptoms among individuals with Long COVID, including examples of fluctuating, worsening, new-onset, improving, resolving, and stable courses for individual symptoms. Participants in the engagement process favored inclusion of a non-exhaustive list of possible symptoms and conditions in the definition, and there was strong support for including language around the fluctuating time course of some individuals’ symptoms. Some of the previously developed Long COVID definitions do give examples of common symptoms, and some mention relapsing-remitting and other possible time courses of symptoms, while others do not discuss these aspects. The committee elected to include both aspects in the 2024 NASEM Long COVID definition. 

Findings from the Evidence Review 

Signs, Symptoms, and Conditions: Disease definitions may or may not include listings of specific signs, symptoms, or symptom clusters; some definitions include required symptoms or symptom clusters. These choices can affect the balance between specificity and inclusivity of a definition. The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition includes a non-exhaustive list of possible manifestations but does not require any specific manifestation. Several studies and reviews have examined the most common or most specific symptoms and manifestations of Long COVID. For example, a RECOVER Initiative prospective cohort study (Figure 4) with 9,764 U.S. adults identified symptoms that were more frequent in individuals at a study visit 6 months or more after a positive SARS-CoV-2 test result than in individuals with no known infection history. The authors developed a Long COVID (post-acute sequelae of COVID-19, or PASC) score based on 12 symptoms; among these symptoms, there was a 15 percent or greater absolute difference between infected and uninfected individuals in frequencies of post-exertional malaise, fatigue, brain fog, dizziness, and gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms. Several other symptoms, such as shortness of breath, were common but were not included in the score because they were correlated with included symptoms (Thaweethai et al., 2023). Woodrow and colleagues conducted a systematic review of studies on Long COVID prevalence and manifestations that were published in 2020 and 2021. They found that fatigue, breathing problems, sleep problems, tingling or itching, and joint or muscle pain were among the most commonly reported Long COVID symptoms (Woodrow, 2023). 

In a 2021 analysis, Deer and colleagues used the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) standardized vocabulary to integrate data from 81 cohorts of patients who were at least 3 weeks post SARS-CoV-2 infection. The use of HPO vocabulary allowed the authors to combine data from cohorts based on patient reports, clinical examinations, and electronic health record (EHR) data pulls, helping overcome the challenge of heterogeneity in how patients and clinicians describe the same symptoms. The authors identified 287 phenotypic abnormalities; 155 of these abnormalities were reported in two or more cohorts and 25 were reported in 12 or more cohorts (Deer et al., 2021). 

Numerous primary studies and systematic reviews have investigated sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection in specific body systems. A non-exhaustive sampling from this large literature base is presented here. 

Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Symptoms and Conditions Many research teams have documented cardiovascular and pulmonary sequelae of SARS-CoV-2, including interstitial lung disease and other lung abnormalities (Bazdar et al., 2023; Woodrow et al., 2023); a new or increased requirement for supplemental oxygen (Admon et al., 2023); platelet pathology and thromboembolic disorders (Pretorius et al., 2022; Shah et al., 2023; Turner et al., 2023); and arrhythmias and tachycardia (Mohammad et al., 2022). 

Autonomic Symptoms and Conditions Multiple research teams have investigated autonomic symptoms and conditions following SARS-CoV-2 infection. A Stanford-based, international study that recruited mainly through social media and in COVID-19 and Long COVID support groups surveyed adults with a history of test-confirmed or test-unconfirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection. Of 2,314 surveyed adults (87.3% female) who had symptoms persisting beyond 30 days, 66% had median scores of 20 or greater on the Composite Autonomic Symptom 31 (COMPASS-31) assessment, indicating moderate to severe autonomic dysfunction (Larsen et al., 2022). Among 42 patients with moderate to severe post-COVID-19 fatigue and exertion intolerance who were evaluated by a medical team in Berlin, 32 patients also had COMPASS-31 scores above 20 (Kedor et al., 2022). An Australian team evaluated 33 adults with PASC who either presented to a cardiology clinic or were recruited from a Long COVID support group. These participants had a median total COMPASS-31 score of 38, and 79 percent met the criteria for postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) (Seeley et al., 2023). 

A systematic review of the literature as of April 2022 examined cases of new-onset autonomic dysfunction affecting the cardiovascular system within 6 weeks of confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection. In the acute phase, reflex syncope was the most common form of autonomic dysfunction affecting the cardiovascular system, while in the chronic phase (>4 weeks after infection), POTS was the most common form. Patients with autonomic dysfunction >4 weeks after infection were mostly female and younger; only 15 percent of these patients experienced a full recovery during the follow-up period (19 ± 16 weeks) (Reis Carneiro et al., 2023). 

Neurological and Psychiatric Symptoms and Conditions Multiple authors have investigated neurological and psychiatric complications and symptoms following SARS-CoV-2 infection, including stroke, migraine, smell and taste problems, cognitive impairment, difficulty concentrating, anxiety, and mood disorders (Crivelli et al., 2022; Nuzzo et al., 2021; Ong et al., 2023; Park et al., 2022; Premraj et al., 2022; Wingrove et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2022). A weighted analysis of a large Department of Veterans Affairs dataset, based on electronic health records, showed increased risk of epilepsy and seizures (hazard ratio 1.80), of cognition problems (hazard ratio 1.80), and of other neurologic sequelae in patients 12 months post SARS-CoV-2 infection compared with uninfected controls (Xu et al., 2022). To investigate sleep disturbances following COVID-19, Linh and colleagues conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of worldwide studies focusing on adults at least 1 month following a SARS-CoV-2 infection. In the subset of studies with an uninfected or pre-infection control group, the authors found an increased prevalence of sleep disturbances in post-COVID-19 patients, with an odds ratio of 2.00 (1.28, 3.14) (Linh et al., 2023). A large community-based study in the United Kingdom (112,964 participants aged 18 or older) used a computerized cognitive test battery to evaluate cognitive functioning in individuals who had recovered from COVID-19 within 4, 4–12, or >12 weeks; individuals who reported unresolved persistent symptoms and were at least 12 weeks post-infection; and individuals who had no history of COVID-19. Results showed that participants whose COVID-19 symptoms had resolved had small deficits in cognitive performance (approximately –0.2 standard deviation on average) compared with those with no history of infection. Those with unresolved symptoms beyond 12 weeks after infection had greater deficits in performance on cognitive tasks (approximately –0.4 SD on average), particularly in memory, reasoning, and planning tasks. Having had a more severe acute infection and having been infected during earlier periods in the pandemic were each associated with higher probabilities of cognitive impairment (Hampshire et al., 2024). It is important to note that some studies have not confirmed cognitive impairment in cohorts of Long COVID patients. In a narrative literature review by Garmoe and colleagues, most studies supported the occurrence of cognitive impairment in some individuals after SARS-CoV-2 infection, but a subset of three small studies (n=49–189 patients) failed to demonstrate cognitive dysfunction attributable to COVID-19 up to 6 months after infection (Garmoe et al., 2024). 

Systemic, Musculoskeletal, Rheumatic, and Immune-Related Symptoms and Conditions Multiple research teams have documented post-COVID-19 systemic, musculoskeletal, rheumatic, and immune-related complications, including new-onset lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, and Sjogren’s syndrome (Chang at al., 2023; Ciaffi et al., 2023; Kioi et al., 2023). Studies have also reported hyperlipidemia (Xu et al., 2023) and new-onset diabetes (Qeadan, et al., 2022). For example, a retrospective analysis of data from 27 million U.S. patients found that having a diagnosed SARS-CoV-2 infection was associated with significantly increased risk of new-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus compared with individuals with no history of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and this risk was disproportionately higher among American Indian/Alaska Native, Asian/Pacific Islander, and Black participants (Qeadan et al., 2022). Additionally, other teams have investigated similarities and possible overlap between Long COVID mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS) (Szukiewicz et al., 2022), fibromyalgia (Clauw and Calabrese, 2024; Gavrilova et al., 2022; Savin et al., 2023), and connective tissue disorders like Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) (Lim et al., 2023; Pollack et al., 2023). The RECOVER Initiative and several studies have documented that up to 40 percent of patients with clusters of persistent symptoms meet the diagnostic criteria for ME/CFS following SARS-CoV-2 infection (Bonilla et al., 2023; Kedor et al., 2022; Mancini et al., 2021; Sherif et al., 2023). Persistent fatigue following SARS-CoV-2 infection is well-documented (Sherif et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023). 

Exacerbation of Pre-Existing Conditions Long COVID can present as a new condition that develops after SARS-CoV-2 infection. It can also worsen pre-existing health conditions, as shown in several studies. Among individuals with pre-existing type 1 diabetes, a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection was associated with an increased risk of experiencing diabetic ketoacidosis (Qeadan et al., 2022). The American Diabetes Association’s Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024 guideline provides information on the occurrence of new-onset diabetes after SARS-CoV-2 infection and includes a recommendation that individuals with underlying diabetes who have had COVID-19 should receive follow-up to assess possible complications and symptoms (American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee, 2024). Among patients with POTS evaluated at a University of Toledo center, 68 percent (28/41) of those infected with SARS-CoV-2 had a worsening of their baseline POTS symptoms that persisted more than 1 month post-infection, and 29 percent had persistent, exacerbated symptoms despite escalation of therapy (Meenakshisundaram et al., 2024). 

Temporal Pattern and Duration of Symptoms: Another notable feature of Long COVID is the variable course of symptoms. An international survey distributed primarily to participants in COVID-19 support and advocacy groups found that 85.9 percent of respondents who had experienced COVID-19-related illness for at least 28 days reported that they had experienced relapses of symptoms during the survey period (which spanned up to 7 months) (Davis et al., 2021). In the ComPaRe Long COVID cohort (968 patients), part of a prospective study in France, 33.3 percent of 150 participants who reported full symptom remission later experienced a relapse (Tran et al., 2022). Other studies provide evidence that neurocognitive symptoms can worsen over time and that new manifestations, such as cognitive symptoms, post-exertional malaise, paresthesia, and parosmia, commonly appear for the first time months after the initial infection (Apple et al., 2022; Davis et al., 2021; Tran et al., 2022). In a ComPaRe Long COVID cohort study, the prevalence of individual symptoms decreased (e.g., cough, change/loss of taste), increased (e.g. paresthesia, back/neck pain), or remained stable (e.g., dyspnea, word finding problems) between 2 months and 1 year after infection (Tran et al., 2022). Similarly, in a systematic review and meta-analysis based on 63 articles published worldwide in September 2021 or earlier, Alkodaymi and colleagues found that certain symptoms (cough, loss of taste, loss of smell, headache) were most commonly reported during the 6- to <9-months follow-up interval, while other symptoms (fatigue, myalgia, dyspnea, and sleep disorder) were most common in the >12-month follow-up period (Alkodaymi et al., 2022). 

In an integrated model for overall symptom trajectory proposed by Fernández-de-las-Peñas and coauthors, post-COVID-19 symptoms are divided into “new-onset” (symptoms that first appeared after infection with COVID-19) and “exacerbated” (pre-existing symptoms that worsened after infection with COVID-19); symptoms can be further labeled as “fluctuating,” “progressive,” and “continuous.” (Fernandez-de-las-Penas et al., 2021a). 

Several studies provide data on the overall durations of symptoms among patients. Among 1,106 randomly sampled adults with wild-type SARS-CoV-2 infections from Zurich, Switzerland (which had mandatory reporting), 27.1 percent, 22.9 percent, and 18.5 percent of infected individuals said they had not fully recovered at 3, 6, and 12 months after infection, respectively (Ballouz et al., 2023). The ComPaRe Long COVID cohort study found that, of patients experiencing symptoms at 2 months post-infection, 85 percent still had symptoms at 12 months after infection (Tran et al., 2022). Symptoms and conditions associated with Long COVID can persist for multiple years. For example, a large Department of Veterans Affairs cohort study found that 2 years after infection, participants who had not been hospitalized during their acute infection still had an increased risk for 24 of 77 sequelae analyzed, including sequelae affecting the neurologic, musculoskeletal, and gastrointestinal systems. Meanwhile, participants who had been hospitalized during the acute phase had an increased risk of 50 of 77 sequelae at 2 years, including those affecting every organ system (Bowe et al., 2023). 

Severity of Symptoms: Long COVID symptoms can range from mild to severe. In the RECOVER Initiative study by Thaweethai and colleagues in which the authors developed a PASC score based on 12 symptoms, patients who met the authors’ criteria for PASC had responses on the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Global 10 scale ranging from “not at all” to “completely” for ability to carry out every day physical activities, and responses ranging from “poor” to “excellent” on both quality of life and general physical health. Higher PASC score was associated with worse responses on PROMIS Global 10 (Thaweethai et al., 2023). As of 2023, estimates suggest that over 5,000 U.S. death certificates have attributed Long COVID (or related terms) as an underlying or contributing cause of death (Ahmad et al., 2022; Rapaport, 2024). A large Department of Veterans Affairs cohort study found that veterans who had been hospitalized with COVID-19 had an elevated risk of death that persisted throughout the 2-year follow-up period, compared with a control group of veterans with no known SARS-CoV-2 infection. Compared with the control group, veterans who were not hospitalized during their acute COVID-19 illness were at increased risk of death during days 91–180 and at increased risk of hospitalization during days 361–540 following their acute infection (Bowe et al., 2023). 

Findings from the Engagement Process 

Participants noted that many people will understand Long COVID through symptoms. Including a list of possible symptoms and conditions associated with Long COVID could help participants understand the breadth and severity of Long COVID. Participants emphasized inclusion of the most common symptoms: “I do think that listing the three or four major symptoms that most studies are showing—brain fog, fatigue, shortness of breath—should be part of the definition”; another proposed, “Cognitive dysfunction is as important to include as physical symptoms, especially since cognitive dysfunction is highly stigmatized.” Participants also emphasized the relapsing and remitting nature of symptoms. Some mentioned that these recurring symptoms hindered access to proper care, as some physicians lacked an understanding or were skeptical of this pattern. For instance, one participant said, “Many of my patients, when we would talk about the definition, would find it validating that the definition itself from the WHO said that the symptoms were intermittent. I think that’s a key part of the definition, because the patients have often experienced medical gaslighting. A lot of that is due to the inconsistency of the symptoms. I liked having that phrase in the definition that I can tell my patients, ‘Look, that’s part of this condition, and this is what you could show your employer and your family.’ I like that.” 

Lessons from Existing Definitions 

The OASH and CDC definitions acknowledge the heterogeneity of presentations by including wording like “multisystemic” and “wide range” without listing specific symptoms. The NICE definition also mentions “clusters of symptoms” but does not list specific symptoms and acknowledges that symptoms may be multisystemic and heterogeneous. By contrast, the WHO Adults and Pediatrics definitions give specific common symptoms, while stating that other symptoms may appear. It is useful to consider whether any symptom or cluster of symptoms could be considered a hallmark or cardinal symptom of Long COVID. However, considering the heterogeneity of Long COVID manifestations, a definition that does not require any specific symptom or symptom cluster has the advantage of reducing false negative classifications. A definition that provides a non-exhaustive list of common symptoms may help balance the goals of specificity and inclusivity. The OASH definition includes the phrase “with the possibility of severe and life-threatening events even months or years after infection.” The other existing definitions considered here do not directly mention severity, though both WHO definitions state that symptoms generally impact everyday functioning. A sound definition asserts what a term means rather than stating what it does not mean; hence the 2024 NASEM Definition avoids stating, for example, that Long COVID is not one condition. 

How Does the Definition Address Equity? 

Important Features: LC can affect children and adults, regardless of health, disability, or socioeconomic status, age, sex, gender, sexual orientation, race, ethnicity, or geographic location. 

The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition does not exclude patients based on demographic factors, preexisting conditions, vaccination status, or history of antiviral use. This definition applies to both adult and pediatric patients. 

Equity needs to be considered at multiple steps in a Long COVID patient’s journey to obtain care and services. Socioeconomic factors, inequality, discrimination (based on race and gender, among others), bias, and stigma affect whether patients can receive a diagnosis and benefit from Long COVID-targeted health care or services. These factors include but are not limited to access to COVID-19 testing during acute illness, access to evaluation for possible Long COVID, the willingness of physicians to diagnose a particular patient, access to insurance benefits, and patients’ fears of stigmatization that could result from having a Long COVID diagnosis (Bergmans et al., 2023; HHS and OASH, 2022; Kim et al., 2023; Kromydas et al., 2023). 

Among participants in the engagement process, there was support for recognition of the impact of social determinants of health on the risk of Long COVID, the impact of cultural factors on decisions to seek health care, and the impact of Long COVID itself on financial status, especially among those with fewer economic resources. In the evidence review, the committee encountered data gaps, highlighting the possibility that under-diagnosis of Long COVID in communities with less healthcare access and under-representation of or under-reporting on some non-white groups in Long COVID research is influencing the Long COVID research base. However, the committee found evidence suggesting that Long COVID more frequently affects women, and some research supporting differences in Long COVID prevalence or manifestations among different age groups, among different racial and ethnic groups, or based on vaccination status. While the committee recognizes such differences in risk factors, the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition emphasizes that a Long COVID diagnosis may be considered regardless of health status, vaccination history, or demographics. 

Findings from the Evidence Review 

Social, economic, and environmental factors may affect individuals’ risk for and burden of Long COVID as well as their access to health care for diagnosis and management of Long COVID. Among non-hospitalized individuals who experienced acute SARS-CoV-2 infection, one study found an 11 percent increased risk (HR 1.11, 95% CI 1.07–1.16) of COVID-19 symptom persistence among people in the most socioeconomically deprived versus the least deprived category (Subramanian et al., 2022). Researchers analyzing zip code and electronic health record data from two large clinical research networks found that among people with COVID-19, exposure to disadvantaged environmental characteristics (including certain air pollutants, limited food access, and overall neighborhood deprivation) was associated with increased risk for Long COVID (Zhang et al., 2023). 

Numerous studies indicate that Long COVID is more frequently diagnosed and reported among women (Government of Canada, 2023; M. M. Jacobs et al., 2023; Sylvester et al., 2022). The U.S. Census Bureau and the National Center for Health Statistics’ Household Pulse survey data from March 5 to April 1, 2024, which is based on self-reports, estimates that 21.1 percent of adult women and 13.9 percent of adult men in the United States have ever experienced Long COVID-19 symptoms that lasted 3 months or longer (CDC, 2024a). In the pediatric population as well, girls may be at greater risk for Long COVID (Zheng et al., 2023). The frequencies of specific Long COVID symptoms and manifestations may differ between women and men, and there is some evidence for sex-specific differences in immunological responses during Long COVID (Jiang et al., 2023; Silva et al., 2024; Sylvester et al., 2022). Additional evidence regarding sex- and gender-related risk factors for Long COVID is discussed below in the section “How Does the Definition Address Risk Factors?” 

Results of some analyses suggest that the risk of Long COVID after an acute infection may differ among racial and ethnic groups in the United States, with most studies indicating a higher risk for Hispanic and Black individuals and a lower risk for Asian individuals compared with non-Hispanic White individuals (CDC, 2024a; Cohen and van der Meulen Rodgers, 2023; M. M. Jacobs et al., 2023; Louie and Wu, 2023). Members of other racial and ethnic groups, such as American Indian, Alaska Native, Native Hawaiian, Pacific Islander, and multiracial individuals, are not tracked separately in most studies. The risk of Long COVID among these groups is currently a data gap. 

In the U.S. Census Bureau and National Center for Health Statistics’ Household Pulse survey data from March 1 to April 1, 2024, 21.2 percent of adult Hispanic or Latino respondents, 17.7 percent of non-Hispanic White respondents, 12.9 percent of non-Hispanic Black respondents, 12.1 percent of non-Hispanic Asian respondents, and 20.7 percent of non-Hispanic members of other races and multiple races reported having ever experienced Long COVID-19 symptoms that lasted 3 months or longer (CDC, 2024a). A two-stage modeling analysis based on Household Pulse data (four releases between June 1, 2022, and October 17, 2022) by Jacobs and colleagues (2023) that considered only participants who had COVID-19 found a comparatively higher risk of Long COVID among Hispanic participants and a slightly higher, statistically significant risk of Long COVID among Black participants (M. M. Jacobs et al., 2023). Several studies suggest that the frequency of specific symptoms and manifestations of Long COVID may differ among racial and ethnic groups (Khullar et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2021). 

In a series of interviews by Bergmans and colleagues, multiple Black participants with Long COVID described their experiences of being treated dismissively by doctors or being sent home with COVID-19 or Long COVID symptoms (Bergmans et al. 2022). In another report by Bergmans and colleagues, based on a series of interviews with Black Americans who have Long COVID, participants described challenges in receiving care (including racial bias in medical treatment, health care costs, insurance coverage, and others) as well as impacts of social determinants of health on individuals’ ability to manage their symptoms (including housing quality, neighborhood socioeconomic status, and access to healthy food). Black Americans are also underrepresented in Long COVID research (Bergmans et al., 2023). 

Existing gaps in access to health care for the diagnosis of Long COVID could in turn affect research on Long COVID. As part of the RECOVER initiative, Hill and colleagues conducted a retrospective case–control study based on EHR data from 31 health systems; though the study was designed to identify risk factors for Long COVID, the authors also found that living in a county with a greater number of physicians per capita was associated with higher likelihood of Long COVID diagnosis or care at a Long COVID clinic. This suggests that underdiagnosis may be occurring among people with less access to health care. The authors point out that studies relying on EHR data may be influenced by existing biases and disparities in health care access (Hill et al., 2023). Ensuring the inclusion of all ethnic and racial groups in future research will be critical to improving the Long COVID research base and informing patient care (Bergmans et al., 2023; Khullar et al., 2023). 

Long COVID can occur in the pediatric population and in adults of any age (SeyedAlinaghi et al., 2023). As in adults, Long COVID in children and adolescents can manifest with symptoms and conditions affecting a wide range of body systems or as an exacerbation of underlying conditions, or both (Rao et al., 2024). 

Findings from the Engagement Process 

Participants agreed that the definition should apply equitably to all people with Long COVID and that it is important to recognize that different people have different symptoms and experiences. Participants also emphasized the importance of a definition that supports access to services for people with Long COVID, thereby advancing equity. Many participants also deemed it significant to include the financial challenges posed by Long COVID to individuals of low socio-economic status; a majority indicated a desire to acknowledge the social determinants of health that can influence the likelihood of developing Long COVID, such as poverty, race, and geographic location. Comments were also shared about explicitly linking the definition for Long COVID to equity considerations due to the impact that COVID-19 and Long COVID have had at an individual level and also within communities that have less access to care or to economic resources. A participant said, “It could be helpful to include a specific statement around health equity in a Long COVID definition. That would maybe be a little unusual to include in a definition, but it is important, if not in the definition, somewhere else.” Participants also suggested that the definition reflect cultural humility and sensitivity. For example, one participant commented, “Then there is also a cultural aspect in some communities where if you literally are not dropping [to the floor], you are fine to go to work. That is really problematic with a condition like Long COVID where your prognosis is significantly negatively affected when you try to do something like push through.” 

Lessons from Existing Definitions 

While existing definitions of Long COVID exhibit an overarching aim towards inclusivity, a specific mention of equity considerations is notably absent from all definitions. All definitions approach Long COVID primarily from a clinical standpoint, largely overlooking the socioeconomic and demographic factors that could markedly influence Long COVID’s distribution, severity, and patient outcomes. 

In 2022, a group of stakeholders informed by data from the CLoCK Study of Long COVID in children and young people and by patients’ experiences developed a research definition for Long COVID in children and young people using a modified Delphi process to achieve consensus (Stephenson et al., 2022). In 2023, the WHO released a separate Pediatric definition for Long COVID. 

How Does the Definition Address Functional Impairment? 

Important Features: LC can impair individuals’ ability to work, attend school, take care of family, and care for themselves. It can have a profound emotional and physical impact on patients and their families and caregivers. 

A definition for Long COVID may or may not address its potential effects on functionality and daily living or its effects on overall well-being (e.g., financial, employment, quality-adjusted life-years [QALYs]). The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition emphasizes that some individuals with Long COVID are severely affected and can have a variety of activity limitations. This can profoundly affect patients’ and caregivers’ lives and is an important feature of Long COVID. 

In the evidence review, the committee found publications documenting a range of mild to severe functional impairments, activity limitations, and quality of life impacts in individuals with Long COVID. It is also important to note that Long COVID symptoms may affect functionality in different domains. For example, individuals may be impaired in daily home functioning, working capacity, or both (Ford et al., 2023). Participants in the engagement process noted that impairments in Long COVID can be invisible to others and supported inclusion of functional impairment in the definition of Long COVID. 

Findings from the Evidence Review 

Many primary studies and systematic reviews have highlighted the potential impact of Long COVID on activities of daily living. The authors of a systematic review based on a literature search of articles published in July 2021 or earlier investigated the range of activity limitations, physical function limitations, and health-related quality of life (HRQoL) impacts in COVID-19 survivors, many of whom had been hospitalized (de Oliveira Almeida et al., 2023). Participants were evaluated during time spans ranging from the day of admission to rehabilitation after acute care to 7 months after discharge from the hospital. The analysis revealed impaired performance among the COVID-19 survivors on pulmonary function and muscle strength tests, physical tests such as the 6-minute walk test, and daily living activities scales such as the Lawton scale (de Oliveira Almeida et al., 2023; Piquet et al., 2021). A systematic review by Figuereido and colleagues focused on HRQoL after discharge among patients who had been hospitalized with COVID-19 (Figueiredo et al., 2022). Among six included studies that compared people hospitalized for COVID-19 with either the general population or matched controls, all found lower scores on HRQoL instruments (SF-36, 15D, St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire, or Short Form-12) for the post-COVID-19 individuals at time points ranging up to 3 months post-discharge. The authors write that although lower HRQoL can persist for months after hospitalization for COVID-19, partial improvements in HRQoL are often observed soon after hospitalization (Figueiredo et al., 2022). 

As reported in the U.S. Census Bureau and the National Center for Health Statistics’ Household Pulse Survey data (March 5 to April 1, 2024), 23.8 percent of U.S. adults currently experiencing Long COVID were estimated to have significant activity limitations and 78.7 percent were estimated to have any activity limitation from Long COVID (CDC, 2024a). In a UK study, patients receiving care at post-COVID-19 clinics were evaluated using the Work and Social Adjustment Scale (WSAS), a patient-reported measure of functional impairment. Of the participants, 53 percent scored over 20, indicating “moderately severe” impairment; impacts were observed across all five domains of the WSAS (Walker, 2023). That study also found a large impact on quality of life for many patients, with a median score of 0.60 (IQR 0.41 to 0.71) on the EQ-5d, a measure of HRQoL (Walker, 2023). In the LONG-COVID-EXP-CM study, a multicenter cohort study in Spain, 1,593 patients who were hospitalized during the first wave of the pandemic were later interviewed regarding their self-perceived functional status and limitations in comparison with their status before their COVID-19 illness. Interviews took place at T1 (mean 8.4 months after discharge) and T2 (mean 13.2 months after discharge). The percentages of patients reporting limitations at T1 and T2, respectively, were 20.9 percent and 12.8 percent for occupational activities, 30.1 percent and 20.8 percent for leisure/social activities, 27.1 percent and 18.1 percent for instrumental activities, and 19.9 percent and 13.7 percent for basic activities (Fernández-de-Las-Peñas et al., 2022c). 

Long COVID can have serious impacts on employment. An analysis of the University of Southern California’s longitudinal survey, Understanding America Study, found that 25.9 percent of “long haulers” in mid-2021 reported that their symptoms affected their employment or work hours; these affected individuals worked 50 percent fewer hours compared to people who had never had COVID-19 (Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 2022). Among patients in Long COVID support groups who were surveyed in the fall of 2020, 45.2 percent said they required reduced work hours, and an additional 22.3 percent said they were not working due to their symptoms (Bowe et al., 2023). Based on estimates of Long COVID prevalence rates, impairment rates, and labor impacts, economist David Cutler estimated that Long COVID has caused 3.5 million people to leave the labor force as of 2022. With the assumption that Long COVID cases last an average of 5 years with no change in severity, Cutler estimated that the cost of Long COVID would amount to $3.7 trillion (including the costs of lost QALYs, lost earnings, and increased medical spending) (Cutler, 2022). An April 2024 analysis by Economist Impact found that Long Covid symptoms have prompted some individuals to leave the workforce (estimated 953.6 million hours lost), others take time off work (estimated 363.3 million hours lost) or reduce their work hours due to symptoms (estimated 177.5 million hours lost)—resulting in 1.5 billion work hours lost in 2024 and a potential cost of more than $152.6 billion (Economist Impact, 2024). 

Although there is little available published data regarding the impact of Long COVID on caregivers and families of patients, anecdotal reports indicate that caregivers are experiencing a wide range of impacts including financial and logistical challenges, impacts to employment, and impacts to their own health, among others (McGowan, 2023; Olsen, 2021). While caregiver burdens and impacts have been documented in other chronic illnesses (Strang et al., 2018), caregiver and family burdens in the context of Long COVID appear to be a research gap that merits further attention. 

Findings from the Engagement Process 

Participants consistently called for the concept of impairment to be included in the definition of Long COVID, as many patients find that their symptoms interfere with daily functioning (such as socially, occupationally, mentally, and other aspects of daily life). The inclusion of a statement on impairment could affect degrees of access to disability and services accommodations. For example, one participant noted, “What we need to be able to do with the definition, or a subset of it, is determine a degree of impairment because so many people are disabled.” Another underlined the importance of including impairment in the definition, because many of the symptoms are invisible: “When I think about Long COVID, it’s about the symptoms that are causing functional impairment that you do not see.” 

Lessons from Existing Definitions 

Only one of the existing definitions, that of the USG, directly discusses Long COVID severity. The USG stands out for its acknowledgment of Long COVID’s potential severity, noting that Long COVID “may present with a relapsing-remitting pattern and progression or worsening over time, with the possibility of severe and life-threatening events even months or years after infection.” This characterization underscores the broad spectrum of severity that Long COVID can encompass, hinting at its substantial implications for patient health and quality of life. Although this description hints at the variable severity and potential for significant health consequences, it stops short of explicitly discussing “functional impairment.” Additionally, a Long COVID definition may need to include people with different current levels of severity or impairment. On the other hand, the WHO Adult and WHO Pediatric definitions directly address the functional consequences of Long COVID. The WHO Adult definition mentions that symptoms “generally have an impact on everyday functioning,” including issues like fatigue, difficulty breathing, and cognitive challenges. The WHO Pediatric definition broadens this perspective, noting that symptoms “generally have an impact on everyday functioning” and can influence various aspects of a child’s life, including eating habits, physical activity levels, behavior, academic achievements, and social interactions. These insights from the WHO underscore the critical need to consider functional impairment and the spectrum of severity when fully understanding Long COVID’s effects on individuals’ lives. 

How Does the Definition Address Alternative Diagnoses? 

The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition does not include mention of alternative diagnoses. 

Many diseases, like Long COVID, can share symptoms or characteristics with other conditions, leading to overlap and confusion in diagnosis. A disease definition could list exclusionary conditions or indicate the consideration of exploring alternative diagnoses (Lim and Son, 2020). For example, the Ramsay definition of ME/CFS considers depression and anxiety to be exclusionary conditions. In contrast, the IOM ME/CFS definition does not list exclusionary conditions (Lim and Son, 2020). 

The committee elected not to include a statement regarding exclusions or alternative diagnoses in the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition. First, there is no scientific evidence that any medical condition prevents or cannot exist alongside Long COVID. Second, the history of a similarly debilitating medical condition, ME/CFS, illustrates that such requirements can lead to a denied or delayed diagnosis. Patients have reported that clinicians were reluctant to diagnose them with ME/CFS if any other co-morbidity—like reactive depression—was present that could partially explain their symptoms even as aspects of their presentation—like a post-acute-infectious onset or post-exertional malaise—were not typical for mood disorders. Conversely, clinicians have voiced hesitation to diagnose ME/CFS because they were not confident they had eliminated enough alternative conditions when the disease was framed as a diagnosis of exclusion.

The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition does include ME/CFS and POTS, among others, as examples of diagnosable conditions that can be part of the picture of Long COVID. These and other potentially overlapping conditions are compatible with a diagnosis of Long COVID. To the contrary, evidence exists these conditions may be more common among Long COVID patients than the general population, and that they might share some common physiological pathways (Komoraff and Lipkin 2023). For example, patients may be diagnosed with Long COVID and POTS or Long COVID and ME/CFS. In addition, patients may be diagnosed with Long COVID and new-onset diabetes, Long COVID and new-onset rheumatoid arthritis, etc. Long COVID is thus an umbrella term and can be diagnosed alongside associated conditions. This is in accord with the WHO-Pediatrics definition for Long COVID, which states that other diagnoses do not exclude a diagnosis of Long COVID but is in contrast to the WHO-Adults definition and the NICE definition, which specify that Long COVID symptoms must not be “explained by an alternative diagnosis.” Lack of language concerning alternative diagnoses does not absolve health care professionals of their clinical responsibilities, which include generating a reasonable differential diagnosis, testing for other causes of a patients’ symptoms, re-considering initial impressions, and monitoring patients with uncertain diagnoses regularly and carefully. Despite not including this element in the definition, the committee articulates relevant findings below.

Findings from the Evidence Review

When discussing the long-term ramifications of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection, it is useful to consider another well-described condition called the post-intensive care syndrome (PICS). PICS is an intense form of suffering that persists during the months and years following treatment in medical and surgical intensive care unit (ICUs), which of course includes survivors of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection (Nanwani-Nanwani et al., 2022; Weidman et al., 2022). There are hundreds of thousands of people around the world who—after prolonged hospital courses on mechanical ventilation and dialysis during acute SARS-CoV-2 infection—are now experiencing cognitive, mental health, and physical disabilities (Hägglöf et al., 2023; Heesakkers et al., 2022; Jackson et al., 2010; Neville et al., 2022; Roedl et al., 2022; Sevin and Ely, 2022). These hospital survivors are struggling to recover from a constellation of symptoms and conditions that often include both PICS and Long COVID. These two conditions have a tremendous amount of overlap, and it is important to acknowledge that some patients have both PICS and Long COVID.

There are some relevant distinctions. Both PICS and Long COVID involve structural and functional organ dysfunction of the brain, heart, lungs, kidneys, muscles, and nerves. The mechanisms of PICS and Long COVID likely vary (e.g., immune dysregulation, mitochondrial disease). PICS, unlike Long COVID, can include non-infectious triggers (pancreatitis) as well as infectious triggers (including infections unrelated to SARS-CoV-2). Clinically, both often leave patients with troublesome cognitive impairment that meets the criteria for mild to moderate dementia. While there is early evidence to indicate that PICS patients may find improvements in memory and executive function after cognitive rehabilitation, Long COVID patients anecdotally report that “brain exercises” or even simply reading causes them days of mental worsening. Similarly, while fatigue and neuromyopathy are common in PICS, post-exertional malaise that Long COVID patients experience is often more unpredictable and refractory than that seen in PICS (Jackson et al., 2012). It can be challenging clinically to differentiate within an individual patient between PICS and Long COVID related symptoms, thus clinicians and patients must work together to decipher what therapies help versus which exacerbate symptoms.

In summary, PICS can follow treatment in intensive care, and Long COVID can follow acute SARS-CoV-2 infection. While different in etiology, the two conditions overlap in symptoms of cognitive impairment and profound fatigue. When patients with Long COVID have also been treated with intensive care, either the infection or the experience of treatment, or both, could be contributing factors to their condition. Further research will be needed to understand better the pathophysiology of both PICS and Long COVID and to determine whether similar or different treatment regimens will provide the best care for patients.

Similarly, a notable proportion of individuals presenting with symptoms consistent with Long COVID also meet the diagnostic criteria for or exhibit symptoms of other diagnosable conditions such as POTS or other forms of dysautonomia (Larsen et al., 2022; Kedor et al., 2022; Seeley et al., 2023), or ME/CFS (Goldenberg, 2023; Morrow et al., 2022), although most ME/CFS criteria require at least 6 months of symptoms in contrast to the 3 months of symptoms required by the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition. POTS is a clinical syndrome often triggered by infection that can include symptoms associated with a dysfunctional vasomotor and sympathetic nervous system (e.g., lightheadedness, palpitations, and headache) (Diekman and Chung, 2023; Morrow et al., 2022). ME/CFS is characterized by persistent fatigue, post-exertional malaise, unrefreshing sleep, orthostatic intolerance, and cognitive impairment; many but not all cases are reported to occur following an infectious or infectious-like illness (Goldenberg, 2023; Vivaldi et al., 2023). Long COVID may be considered alongside dysautonomia presentations other than POTS, mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS), or a range of other diagnoses (Diekman and Chung, 2023; Larsen et al., 2022; Morrow et al., 2022). Long COVID can be diagnosed alongside these and other conditions.

Findings from the Engagement Process

Most participants did not feel that the definition required language about excluding alternative diagnoses or considering Long COVID a diagnosis of exclusion. However, one participant noted that when symptoms are solely attributed to Long COVID, there have been instances of missed diagnoses, like lung cancer, when patients await care at Long COVID clinics.

Lessons from Existing Definitions

The WHO Pediatrics definition acknowledges the potential for additional diagnoses coexisting with Long COVID in children and adolescents, allowing for a broad diagnostic scope: “Workup may reveal additional diagnoses, but this does not exclude the diagnosis of post COVID-19 condition.” The WHO Adults definition and the NICE definition specify that Long COVID symptoms must not be “explained by an alternative diagnosis.”

How Does the Definition Address Biomarkers?

Important Features: LC can be diagnosed on clinical grounds. No biomarker currently available demonstrates conclusively the presence of LC.

Although Long COVID is defined as a chronic condition that occurs following a SARS-CoV-2 infection, the current evidence base does not indicate a clear pathobiology that is universal among patients. Long COVID symptoms appear to arise from pathobiological changes that span many different organ systems and tissues (Deer et al., 2021), and no definitive biomarker for Long COVID has yet been identified. It may be that no single or small number of biomarkers will explain the vast complexity of Long COVID (Al-Aly and Topol, 2024).

From the evidence review and engagement process, the committee determined that the research and medical communities have not yet identified any diagnostic tests that are well documented to have high specificity and sensitivity for Long COVID. Therefore, the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition does not include any requirements for biomarker testing that must be performed before diagnosing Long COVID.

However, numerous studies and reviews have identified pathobiological abnormalities (e.g., immune dysfunction and coagulation abnormalities) in patients experiencing Long COVID. These findings, elaborated on below, make it clear that Long COVID is a physical health condition. These findings also raise the possibility that further discoveries will enable biomarkers to be incorporated in a revised, future Long COVID definition.

Findings from the Evidence Review

Over 200 potential biomarkers for Long COVID are currently under investigation, often in connection with hypotheses regarding pathobiology. However, more research is needed to overcome the limitations of the data, and candidate biomarkers need validation in larger studies, including clinical studies (Espin et al., 2023; Lai et al., 2023). In a systematic review of biomarkers in Long COVID published in January 2023, Lai and colleagues discussed 113 biomarkers that have been significantly associated with Long COVID in 28 eligible studies (Lai et al., 2023). These biomarkers include 38 cytokine/chemokines, 24 biochemical markers, 20 vascular markers, 6 neurological markers, 5 acute phase proteins, and 20 others. Of these, the authors state that upregulated interleukin 6, C-reactive protein, and tumor necrosis factor alpha could potentially be used to support Long COVID diagnosis or clinical management. In addition, increased levels of neurofilament light chain and glial fibrillary acidic protein could potentially serve as biomarkers for Long COVID with neurological manifestations, while increased transforming growth factor beta could potentially serve as a biomarker for Long COVID with pulmonary manifestations (Lai et al., 2023). A scoping review by Espín and colleagues published in May 2023 identified a longer list of 239 candidate biomarkers from 23 cohort studies; these include cellular biomarkers (e.g. T regulatory cells), immunoglobulins, cytokines/chemokines, and others. Some of the reviewed studies aimed to develop biomarkers for Long COVID risk prediction during acute illness, while others investigated potential biomarkers for specific Long COVID symptoms or manifestations (Espin et al., 2023).

Several research groups have investigated the persistence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA or proteins after a SARS-CoV-2 infection. For example, one small study found S1 protein in the plasma of 64 percent of 22 people with Long COVID and in 35 percent of a control group of 17 people who had had COVID-19 but did not develop Long COVID; none of these participants had been vaccinated against COVID-19 (Schultheiss et al., 2023). Another research team used the Simoa (Quanterix) single molecule array detection platform to analyze the presence of SARS-CoV-2 spike, S1, and nucleocapsid antigens in 660 plasma specimens collected from 171 adults during the 14 months following their RNA-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections. They found at least one detectable SARS-CoV-2 antigen in 9.2 percent of the specimens, including those from 25 percent of the participants, compared to a 2 percent positivity rate for plasma specimens collected from 250 adults before 2022 (Peluso et al. 2024b).

Evidence of SARS-CoV-2 persistence, including partial viral fragments, complete virus and viral RNA, have been identified months to years after acute infection in tissue biopsy studies and tissue autopsy studies, including in lymph nodes, central nervous system, lung tissue and many other tissue types (Proal et al., 2023).

Multiple research groups have investigated immune dysfunction in Long COVID. According to the authors of a review published as part of the NIH-funded Researching COVID to Enhance Recovery (RECOVER) initiative, both innate and adaptive immune dysregulation may play a role, but many research questions remain open in this area (Mohandas et al., 2023). Potential immune-related contributors to Long COVID that are under investigation include persistent activation of inflammatory pathways in macrophages; transcriptional changes in monocytes, lymphocytes, or dendritic cells; activation of mast cells; and involvement of neutrophils, T cells, or B cells (Altmann et al., 2023; Mohandas et al., 2023; Peluso et al., 2024a). A cross-sectional immune phenotyping study by Klein and colleagues compared participants with a Long COVID diagnosis to matched control individuals who either had no history of SARS-CoV-2 infection or had fully recovered after COVID-19. The participants with Long COVID had significant alterations in circulating myeloid and lymphocyte populations and showed exaggerated humoral responses against both SARS-CoV-2 and herpesviruses (Klein et al., 2023). In an analysis based on the DigiHero cohort study in Germany, both individuals with Long COVID (median of 8 months post infection) and individuals without Long COVID (median of 7.5 months post infection) had markedly elevated levels of monocyte/macrophage‐related soluble factors, including pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic cytokines, compared with people with no COVID-19 history (Schultheiss et al., 2023). In a pre-print study of unvaccinated individuals 8 months post-acute COVID-19, those experiencing Long COVID symptoms (n=27) showed mis-coordination between humoral and cellular responses, signatures of inflammation, and T-cell perturbations suggestive of an ongoing immune response; these changes were not seen in those without Long COVID (n=16) (Yin et al., 2023). Multiple research studies have suggested that SARS-CoV-2 infection, particularly severe infection, can induce auto-antibodies. This phenomenon has also been noted with influenza infection, though to a lesser extent (Altmann et al., 2023; Proal et al., 2023). Other researchers have proposed that reactivation of latent Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) or other herpesviruses during SARS-CoV-2 infection could lead to the production of autoantibodies (Altmann et al., 2023; Mohandas et al., 2023).

Autoimmunity induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection has also been investigated in multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) and severe COVID-19 disease (Altmann et al., 2023; Mohandas et al., 2023). Several research groups have investigated the possibility that interactions between the effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection and pre-existing infections (e.g. HIV) or reactivated, latent viruses (e.g. EBV) could contribute to the development of Long COVID through immune-mediated or other mechanisms (Chen et al., 2023; Peluso et al., 2022).

Pointing to future research directions, an international scientific conference on Long COVID, held by the Keystone Symposia in August 2023, highlighted research on potential pathogenesis and mechanisms of Long COVID, connections to other post-infection complications, diagnosis and biomarkers, disease management, and potential treatment directions (Durstenfeld et al., 2024).

Findings from the Engagement Process

Although there were varying views, overall participants emphasized that adding biomarkers at this time will not improve the definition. One participant said, “We don’t have good biomarkers, and I anticipate in a few years’ time, we probably will have more in the way of biomarkers. I think it’s good to acknowledge that we anticipate the evolution of the definition.”

Lessons from Existing Definitions

No existing Long COVID definitions include explicit mention of specific biomarkers, but the USG definition includes an overarching statement that states, “Long COVID represents many potentially overlapping entities, likely with different biological causes and different sets of risk factors and outcomes.”

How Does the Definition Address Risk Factors?

The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition does not explicitly include risk factors.

Various risk factors, such as underlying comorbid conditions, may influence the risk and presentation of COVID-19 and Long COVID in a particular individual and may be useful in assessing individual patients or populations at risk. However, as risk factors do not in themselves define a disease, the committee chose not to include risk factors in the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition.

Some participants in the engagement process supported including risk factors in the Long COVID definition. In the evidence review, the committee found studies and systematic reviews that support possible risk factors for Long COVID, including female sex, certain health conditions, greater severity of initial COVID-19 illness, reinfection, and others. However, much of the data on Long COVID risk factors has limitations (e.g. some relies on EHR data, which is influenced by existing health care disparities) and some risk factors are difficult to disentangle from one another based on current data (e.g. certain SARS-CoV-2 strains encountered an increasingly vaccinated population; certain health conditions could increase Long COVID risk directly or through increased risk of severe acute illness). The committee’s decision not to include risk factors in the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition is in accord with the previous Long COVID definitions, which do not give risk factors.

Findings from the Evidence Review

Several systematic reviews have examined risk factors for Long COVID. A review and meta-analysis by Tsampasian and colleagues included 41 studies and over 860,000 patients. The authors found evidence in support of several risk factors for Long COVID, including female sex, age above 40, obesity, smoking status, history of hospitalization or ICU admission during acute COVID-19, and several pre-existing conditions (anxiety and/or depression, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, immunosuppression, ischemic heart disease) (Tsampasian et al., 2023). The authors note that it is unclear whether obesity and smoking increase the risk for Long COVID directly or through an increased risk for severe COVID-19. In addition, the association between hospitalization/ICU admission and Long COVID may be influenced by overlap with post-intensive care syndrome (Tsampasian et al., 2023). Some evidence suggests that individuals in middle age groups may be at highest risk for Long COVID. For example, a retrospective case–control study based on data from 31 health systems found that individuals from 40 to 69 years were more likely than adults in other age groups to be diagnosed with Long COVID or to visit a Long COVID clinic (odds ratio [OR] ranging from 2.32 to 2.58). This study also identified female sex, greater severity of acute infection, obesity, chronic lung disease, depression, and metastatic cancer as risk factors. The authors note that the reliance on EHR data is a limitation of this study because such data may be influenced by existing biases and disparities in health care access (Hill et al., 2023). An analysis of data from the LONG-COVID-EXP-CM study, a multicenter cohort study in Spain, found that female sex was associated with greater odds of reporting ≥3 post-COVID symptoms at a mean of 8.4 months post-discharge (adjusted OR 2.54, 95% CI 1.671–3.865, p < 0.001) among 1,969 individuals who had been hospitalized with COVID-19 (Fernandez-de-Las-Peñas et al., 2022b). Among children and adolescents, a review and meta-analysis with 40 studies identified possible risk factors for Long COVID including older age; female sex; and history of severe COVID-19, multisystemic inflammatory disease, or hospitalization for COVID-19 (Zheng et al., 2023).

Multiple studies support an association between greater severity of initial COVID-19 illness and higher risk for Long COVID. For example, Xie and colleagues investigated the impact of the severity of acute illness among 181,384 veterans (average age, 67.13; 90.47 percent male) using data in the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs database. After adjustment for age, race, sex, comorbidities, and other factors, and after subtraction of background symptoms using a comparison group of uninfected veterans, the authors calculated the burden of Long COVID (defined as the number of individuals per 1,000 who had at least one of 33 specific SARS-CoV-2-attributed sequelae). They found that the adjusted burden of Long COVID at 6 months was 44.51 for non-hospitalized patients, 217.08 for hospitalized patients, and 360.16 for patients who had been in intensive care (Xie et al., 2021). As part of the LONG-COVID-EXP-CM study, 1,969 patients who were hospitalized with COVID-19 between February and May 2020 were interviewed a mean of 8.4 months post discharge. The number of symptoms at hospital admission (OR 1.309, 95% CI 1.15–1.49) and the number of days at the hospital (OR 1.01, 95% CI 1.007–1.017) were each associated (p<0.001) with greater number of post-COVID-19 symptoms at the time of the interview (Fernandez-de-Las-Peñas et al., 2022b). In addition to differences in risk for Long COVID, some analyses support differences between hospitalized and non-hospitalized patients in the prevalence of specific post-COVID-19 symptoms (Fernandez-de-Las-Peñas et al., 2021b, 2023). Despite these associations, because non-severe COVID-19 cases have been far more prevalent than severe cases, most Long COVID cases occur in individuals who did not have severe initial disease (Al-Aly and Topol, 2024).

In support of the suggestion that SARS-CoV-2 reinfections are a risk factor for Long COVID or for increased severity of Long COVID, or both, an analysis of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs national health care database found that individuals with one or more reinfections (n=40,947), compared with those with a single infection (n=443,588), had increased risks of hospitalization, all-cause mortality, and sequelae affecting the pulmonary and multiple extra-pulmonary organ systems, in both the acute (0–30 days) and post-acute (30–180 days) phases after the reinfection. During the post-acute phase, these risks gradually decreased, but elevated risks of death, hospitalization, and having at least one sequela persisted until 6 months after reinfection. In this study, reinfections were recorded between June 2020 and June 2022, when pre-Delta, Delta, and Omicron were the dominant variants (Bowe et al., 2022). There is some evidence to suggest that vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 may lower the risk of Long COVID. In the meta-analysis by Tsampasian and colleagues described above, among four high-quality studies that investigated the effect of vaccination (over 249,000 patients), individuals who had received two vaccine doses had a lower risk of Long COVID (OR 0.57; 95% CI 0.43–0.76) (Tsampasian et al., 2023). Another analysis of the Veterans Affairs database found that people with breakthrough SARS-CoV-2 infection (infection that occurs after vaccination) had a higher risk of post-acute sequelae at 6 months compared with uninfected controls (HR=1.50, 95% CI: 1.46, 1.54), but a lower risk of post-acute sequelae compared with unvaccinated people infected with SARS-CoV-2 (HR=0.85, 95% CI 0.82, 0.89) (Al-Aly et al. 2022). A staggered cohort study based on health records from the United Kingdom, Spain, and Estonia investigated whether vaccination reduces the overall risk of developing Long COVID (defined as having at least one of 25 Long COVID-associated, new symptoms >90 days after a SARS-CoV-2 infection), whether through effects on the risk of infection or through effects on the risk of developing Long COVID after an infection. The analysis included >10 million unvaccinated and >10 million vaccinated individuals. After weighting to reduce confounding, the authors found that vaccination consistently reduced the risk of Long COVID; hazard ratios for a first dose varied from 0.48 to 0.71 depending on the database (Català et al., 2024).

Some reports suggests that infection with SARS-CoV-2 strains circulating earlier in the pandemic may be associated with higher risks for Long COVID (Hedberg et al., 2024; Antonelli et al., 2022). However, it can be difficult to disentangle the effects of the SARS-CoV-2 strain from the effects of concurrent changes in vaccination status, reinfection status, social circumstances, and other confounders (Fernandez-de-Las-Peñas et al., 2022a). The authors of an observational cohort study in Italy used a multivariable logistic regression model to investigate the risk of Long COVID (defined in this study as persistent symptoms more than 4 weeks after SARS-CoV-2 infection) according to patients’ vaccination status and timing of infection. All participants in this study were health care workers and received their first and second vaccine doses in January–February 2021 and a booster dose in November–December 2021. Among 739 non-hospitalized adults with SARS-CoV-2 infection, Long COVID prevalence was 48.1 percent of those infected during wave 1 (February–September 2020, wild-type variant), 35.9 percent in wave 2 (October 2020–July 2021, Alpha variant) and 16.5 percent in wave 3 (August 2021–March 2022, Delta and Omicron variants). However, in the same study, Long COVID prevalence varied from 41.8 percent among unvaccinated participants to 16.0 percent among those with three vaccine doses before infection (Azzolini et al., 2022). In the second report from the Canadian COVID-19 Antibody and Health Surveys, a series of self-report surveys based on random sampling of Canadian adults, the percentage of those infected who said they had persistent symptoms varied over time (27.3 percent of those infected in 2020, 26.7 percent of those infected from January 2021 to June 2021, 14.5 percent of those infected between July 2021 and Nov 2021, 12.7 percent of those infected between December 2021 and May 2022). However, these results may be affected by changes in both the predominant virus variant and changes in the percentage of vaccinated adults over time, as 72.1 percent of Canadian adults received their first vaccine dose by June 2021, and 86.7 percent had completed the primary vaccination series by December 2021. In the same survey, 25.0 percent of participants who were unvaccinated at the time of their initial infection reported persistent symptoms, compared with 13.2 percent of those who received two vaccine doses and 12.2 percent of those who received three vaccine doses (Government of Canada, 2023).

Findings from the Engagement Process

Participants underscored the importance of including specific risk factors in the definition, citing them as key considerations for underserved and minority populations.

Lessons from Existing Definitions

No existing Long COVID definitions include explicit mention of specific risk factors, but the USG definition includes an overarching statement that “Long COVID represents many potentially overlapping entities, likely with different biological causes and different sets of risk factors and outcomes.”

CONSIDERATIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION AND DIFFERENT USES

Participants highlighted the need to develop a definition that is both operational for varied uses and widely acceptable to all users of the definition, with one participant noting, “It is important to consider the different ‘needs’ of the definition. For example, researchers want reproducibility; clinicians and patients want to help people get treatment.” The committee intends its definition to be applied to many purposes. These may include clinical care and diagnosis; eligibility for health services, insurance coverage, disability benefits, and school or workplace accommodations; public health; social services; policy making; epidemiology and surveillance; private and public research; and public awareness and education, especially for patients and their families and caregivers (Pan and Pareek, 2023; Soriano et al., 2022). In all these situations, an ideal Long COVID definition will likely need to interface with existing practices and policies without worsening health disparities or other problems.

This section describes ways in which the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition may be applied for different purposes (clinical, research, and public health surveillance) and provides considerations as well as illustrative examples. The committee also recognizes the need to adopt the definition for policy and service uses and refers the reader to the National Academies report, Long-Term Health Effects Stemming from COVID-19 and Implications for Social Security Administration (NASEM, 2024), to the HHS Guidance on “Long COVID” as a Disability Under the ADA, Section 504, and Section 1557 (HHS, 2021), and to the Social Security Administration’s guidance Long COVID: A Guide for Health Professionals on Providing Medical Evidence for Social Security Disability Claims (SSA, 2023) for key considerations and resources. Long COVID qualifies as a disability under Titles II (state and local government) and III (public accommodations) of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA),2 Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504), 3 and Section 1557 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Section 1557). 4 The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition includes a key feature on functional impairment, but does not address when Long COVID may meet the legal definition of disability. All stakeholders involved in social safety net programs, including payers, workplaces and employers, academic institutions and educators, and support services and government officials, need to be aware of Long COVID to properly support patients, and their families and caregivers in need.

How Can Clinicians Apply the Definition?

By implementing the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition, clinicians can enhance their ability to identify, diagnose, and manage Long COVID effectively. As previously stated, the goal of the definition is to aid clinicians in the consistent diagnosis of Long COVID. The definition is meant to be inclusive and should lead the clinician to provide comprehensive care for individuals experiencing Long COVID. This should also improve patients’ understanding of Long COVID and enhance access to care and effective treatment.

Because of issues concerning COVID-19 test sensitivity, availability, access, and reporting, the 2024 NASEM Long COVID definition does not require a positive COVID-19 test to qualify for a Long COVID diagnosis. For those patients without a positive test, health care professionals will need to use their clinical judgement to decide whether the patients’ clinical picture fits a Long COVID diagnosis. For example, a history of contact with someone with a confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, persistence of symptoms from the time of an acute infection, and/or presence of symptoms like anosmia or post-exertional malaise, which are not common features of other medical conditions, would point towards Long COVID. On the other hand, a long intervening period between acute SARS-CoV-2 infection and occurrence of new symptoms, recurrence of symptom similar to a patient’s pre-COVID co-morbidities, or a diagnosis that better explains the patient’s presentation would not favor a Long COVID diagnosis.

The minimum 3-month duration criterion ensures that patients with persistent symptoms are not overlooked, allowing clinicians to distinguish Long COVID from acute viral effects. This 3-month period can occur anytime: the committee chose not to specify that duration be counted from the instigating acute SARS-CoV-2 infection because studies have shown Long COVID symptoms can appear after a period of seemingly normal health. In cases of unconfirmed, asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections, 3 months can be counted from the initial appearance of the patients’ symptoms. Overdiagnosis of Long COVID can be mitigated by assessing whether a patient’s set of symptoms are consistent with Long COVID and whether another diagnosis could better account for their symptoms.

While conducting their differential diagnosis, clinicians should recognize any concerning symptoms before the 3-month mark to provide appropriate clinical care and avoid missing other unrelated conditions. The broad spectrum of symptoms and associated diagnosable conditions outlined in (but not limited to) the definition provide clinicians with a framework to recognize the diverse manifestations of Long COVID, ranging from respiratory issues to neurological and autoimmune conditions. It is also imperative to recognize that following an acute SARS-CoV-2 infection, an existing diagnosis may notably deteriorate or exacerbate, necessitating clinicians to incorporate this into patient care and align it with the definition of Long COVID. For instance, complications such as controlled asthma escalating to severe asthma with frequent exacerbations exemplify this phenomenon. Moreover, the definition promotes a holistic approach to patient assessment by encouraging the clinician to consider the various symptoms, organ system dysfunctions, and conditions that may be present in a person with Long COVID. The definition also encourages interdisciplinary collaboration among health care specialists. Clinicians should form collaborative teams of relevant experts to address the multi-organ impact of Long COVID.

A multi-disciplinary approach that is team-based will facilitate a more nuanced understanding of Long COVID and allow for tailored diagnostic and treatment strategies based on the specific organ systems affected. This approach aligns with the evolving understanding of Long COVID as a complex and heterogenous disease state, requiring a nuanced and collaborative health care response. Clinicians should be strongly encouraged to conduct thorough evaluations when presented with any symptomatology suggestive of Long COVID, prioritizing testing for potentially serious sequalae.

Clinicians are encouraged to use the ICD-10 code for Long COVID of U09.9 as well as to participate in research collaborations to contribute valuable insights to the growing body of evidence around Long COVID. Clinicians should stay actively engaged in learning about Long COVID to drive continuous improvement in the understanding and management of Long COVID.

Clinician goals include (1) improving patients’ and caregivers’ understanding of Long COVID, (2) effectively assessing and documenting Long COVID, and (3) considering this diagnosis in any patient (inclusive of children and adults of all ages) who presents with persistent symptoms after SARS-CoV-2 infection.

TABLE 2 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition Implementation Checklist for Clinicians 

Step in the Process: Initial Assessment 
Key Considerations:  
•  Consider Long COVID as a possible diagnosis when patients  
with a 3 months or more prior history of SARS-CoV-2 infection  
have persistent symptoms affecting one or more organ systems. 
•  Assess patients for a history of asymptomatic, mild,  moderate,  
or severe SARS-CoV-2 infection (or suspected infection),  
including reinfections. 
•  Assess the duration of symptoms. 

Step in the Process: Comprehensive Medical Evaluation
Key Considerations: 
•	 Obtain and document a detailed clinical history with attention 
to the onset and course of symptoms, recognizing that they can 
be continuous, intermittent, or delayed in onset. 
•	 Consider the use of a comprehensive symptom inventory to 
capture the wide range of manifestations of Long COVID, 
including post-exertional malaise. 
•	 Recognize that Long COVID can present as single or multiple 
symptoms and that severity may vary among individuals and 
even fluctuate for an individual. 
•	 Document the presence and measure the severity of all 
symptoms reported. Common symptoms include shortness of 
breath, persistent fatigue, post-exertional malaise, difficulty 
concentrating, memory changes, recurring headache, dizziness, 
fast heart rate, sleep disturbance, and problems with taste or 
smell. 
•	 Document and measure reported limitations and assess function, 
to see if and how symptoms and conditions are affecting an 
individual’s life (i.e., activities of daily living, work, and quality 
of life). 
•	 Most people affected by Long COVID can be diagnosed 
clinically based on history, physical examination, and/or 
symptom-directed diagnostic testing; yet thorough evaluations 
must be done. Testing for potential serious sequelae of 
SARS-CoV-2 should be prioritized. While certain symptoms 
like palpitations or shortness of breath are prevalent among 
individuals with Long COVID, it is crucial to recognize that 
in a minority of cases, they may signify underlying conditions 
requiring more acute medical intervention. 
•	 Eliminate common and uncommon causes for each individual’s 
symptoms. If, after a diagnosis of Long COVID, new symptoms 
appear or pre-existing symptoms worsen, consider re-evaluating 
these symptoms instead of automatically attributing them to 
Long COVID. 

Step in the Process: Diagnosis of Specific Conditions
Key Considerations:
•	 Identify specific diagnosable conditions associated with Long 
COVID. 
•	 Recognize that some conditions may not be diagnosable at the 
initial visit. 
•	 Assess comorbidities. 

Step in the Process: Diagnostics
Key Considerations:
 •	 Order appropriate diagnostic tests and imaging studies based on  
the suspected organ system involvement. Clinicians must ensure  
comprehensive imaging, functional, and physiological testing is  
done to exclude overt organ pathology necessitating immediate  
medical attention. 
•	 Consider relevant investigations to confirm specific Long 
COVID–related conditions including pulmonary function 
tests, cardiovascular assessments, autonomic te
•	 Use both standard vital signs and pulse oximetry for patients 
with fatigue or respiratory or cardiac symptoms; abnormal 
blood pressure and heart rate findings should be evaluated 
using a 10-minute active standing test for those with orthostatic 
intolerance or other autonomic symptoms. Beyond this, patients 
with ongoing orthostatic symptoms with a normal active stand 
test should be referred for further autonomic testing. 
•	 Understand that many routine tests will be normal, and there is 
currently no diagnostic biomarker for Long COVID. 
•	 Carefully monitor and follow up with patients who continue 
to be sick 4–12 weeks after SARS-CoV-2 infection; clinicians 
might choose to take a conservative diagnostic approach prior 
to the 3-month time frame following the SARS-CoV-2 infection, 
but appropriate diagnostics should not be delayed when there 
are signs and symptoms of urgent/life threatening clinical 
conditions. 

Step in the Process: Treatment	
Key Considerations:
 • While some diagnosable conditions that fall within the  
definition of Long COVID, such as an increased frequency of  
diabetes, are treatable,  other manifestations of Long COVID  
have no FDA-approved treatment.  And no biomarker exists  
to clearly ascribe symptoms and diagnosable conditions to  
Long COVID rather than to other causes.  Treat a diagnosable  
condition related to Long COVID (e.g., diabetes, hypertension,  
POTS,  Sjogren’s syndrome),  based on standard, evidence-based  
guidelines. 
•	 Symptom management for single or multiple symptoms should 
be holistic and should use a multidisciplinary, patient-centered 
approach. 
•	 Treatments for Long COVID or related conditions with minimal 
potential for harm can be trialed while the patient is being 
evaluated or awaiting a diagnosis of Long COVID. For example, 
educating patients about how to conserve/manage their energy 
(also known as pacing) and suggesting compression stockings 
for lightheadedness are relatively benign measures. 
•	 Treatments for possible alternative diagnoses (e.g., sleep hygiene 
for chronic fatigue) can also be trialed. Complete or substantial 
resolution of a patients’ symptoms would argue against a Long 
COVID diagnosis.


Step in the Process: Monitoring and Follow-Up 
Key Considerations:
•  Recognize that patients may require multiple visits over time to  
capture the course of Long COVID’s clinical fluctuations and to  
allow various diagnostic entities to manifest clearly.  
•  Recognize that subspecialty clinic referrals are frequently  
beneficial, particularly for patients with multisystem disorders  
like Long COVID, although access to such follow-up care  
may be a privilege within the health care system. Clear  
communication between the primary Long COVID clinician  
and the subspecialist can avoid poor coordination of care,  
conflicting guidance to the patient,  and drug–drug interaction. 

Step in the Process: Patient and Provider Education 
Key Considerations:
•  Educate patients and caregivers about Long COVID and its  
systemic, long-term impacts. 
•  Provide informational resources as well as resources for  
accessing social services and support groups.  
•  Thoroughly document symptoms, function,  diagnostic findings,  
and treatment plans in the medical records for both clinical care  
and appropriate reimbursement. Careful documentation also  
assists patients in obtaining work/school accommodation and,  if  
needed, disability benefits.  
•  Use the ICD-10 code for Long COVID, U09.9, and codes for  
any diagnosable condition related to Long COVID that may be  
present,  such as ME/CFS (G93.32), POTS (G90.A), disorder of  
the autonomic nervous system, unspecified (G90.9), or MCAS  
(D89.42). 
•  Pay attention to new developments surrounding COVID-19 and  
LC. In particular, we anticipated the definition of LC will evolve  
in the future as we learn more about this medical condition. 

Step in the Process: Patient-Centered Collaborative Care
Key Considerations: 
•  Use a patient-centered approach that works toward “structural  
competency” by employing “cultural and epistemic humility”  
and active listening strategies. 
•  Understand that certain marginalized populations have  
experienced a higher burden of COVID-19, which has led to  
higher numbers of persons from these groups being affected by  
Long COVID, including racial and ethnic minority populations,  
persons with disabilities, and persons without access to health  
care.  
•  Recognize the complexity of Long COVID and facilitate a  
coordinated,  multidisciplinary approach that may include  
primary care clinicians, subspecialty clinicians, nurses, social  
workers/case managers, pharmacists, physical and occupational  
therapists, behavioral health professionals, and others from  
relevant fields.  
•  Be aware that many individuals with Long COVID face stigma,  
and their symptoms and conditions have been misattributed  
to psychiatric causes alone.  Though there are psychiatric  
manifestations of Long COVID, a comprehensive work up  
should be done.

How Can Researchers Apply the Definition?

The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition is by design inclusive and overarching, with many possible areas of use and application; this allows researchers flexibility in designing studies that are consistent with the definition while also sufficiently specific to meet the study objectives. The committee recognizes that most research studies are designed to answer a small number of very focused questions and that this will require identifying a subset of patients who satisfy the overarching definition and also satisfy more restrictive eligibility criteria for the study. Researchers may consider additional criteria to select the subset of Long COVID patients suited to the research project’s aims and hypothesis. The study investigators should specify the following elements:

- Documentation of SARS-CoV-2 infection: Whether and how the initial SARS-CoV-2 infection is documented (e.g., suspected, probable, or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection) or based on self-reported symptoms. Some studies may also include a group of participants with no history of COVID-19 and negative tests for SARS-CoV-2.
- Time period of infection and/or study (e.g., month, year): May be associated with different dominant SARS-CoV-2 variants.
- Predominant Long COVID sub-phenotypes: Long COVID may present as a single symptom, symptom cluster (e.g., neurocognitive, sleep disturbance), or conditions (e.g., postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome [POTS], myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome [ME/CFS]). Where multiple symptoms are present, describe the predominant Long COVID sub-phenotypes that are the focus of study eligibility, if any. Temporal pattern of symptoms: fluctuating, increasing, new onset, persistent, relapsing/remitting, improving, or another pattern.
- Minimum duration of symptoms: e.g., 3 months, 6 months, 12 months.
- Time of onset of symptoms after infection: e.g., 0, 3, 6 months after SARS-CoV-2 infection.
- Severity of illness at the time of SARS-CoV-2 infection: e.g., WHO Clinical Progression Scale: uninfected, ambulatory mild disease, hospitalized moderate, hospitalized severe (Marshall et al., 2020).
- Co-morbid diagnoses: if relevant to the study’s purpose, analysis, or application. Assessment of specific co-morbidities using standardized and validated instruments is recommended and is dependent on the research question.
- Exclusionary criteria: particular conditions (e.g., diagnosis of venous thromboembolism or interstitial lung disease prior to COVID-19).
- Equity in research: Equity must be considered, with additional awareness of and attention to the stigma and under-reporting that often occur with Long COVID. Consider access to and use of tests for SARS-CoV-2 and access to research studies. Consider populations that may be disproportionately affected by SARS-CoV-2 illness (e.g., rural and medically underserved populations; marginalized or minority populations; populations experiencing more severe disease).
- Choice of comparison group: For randomized clinical trials or observational studies, defining the comparison group is critical to interpreting results. The selection of the comparison group depends on the research question and should be justified scientifically.
- Additional design considerations including:
  - Treatment goals (e.g., mitigation of symptoms, cure, prevention)
  - Issues relevant in pediatric research, including children’s ability to communicate their experience and parent stigma/under-reporting
  - The utility of including comparison groups with other IACCs
  - The implications of re-infections and co-infections
  - The value of long-term follow-up to understand the impact on conditions that may be slow to develop (e.g., cancer, Alzheimer’s disease)

Research studies can include observational studies and clinical trials. Observational studies are designed to gather data on the prevalence, risk factors, or natural history of Long COVID symptoms. Study investigators do not assign participants to different treatments in an observational study. Clinical trials are studies designed to test different treatments, with the goal of identifying treatments that are both safe and effective.

Studies may need to deviate from the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition based on the underlying data sources that will be used or the specific study objective(s), as illustrated below for three hypothetical studies: (1) an observational study of MIS-C, (2) an observational study of neurologic sequelae in adults, and (3) a clinical trial of therapies for older adults with sleep disturbances.

When the study inclusion criteria differ from the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition, the investigators are encouraged to (1) explain the rationale for adopting more restrictive or more expansive study inclusion criteria and (2) explain how the use of alternate study-specific inclusion criteria may affect the generalizability or interpretation of study findings.

How Can Public Health Practitioners Apply the Definition?

The surveillance of conditions of public health significance is important for consistent tracking of trends within and across jurisdictions and over time. Federal, state, tribal, local, and territorial public health agencies have a long history of performing surveillance in a variety of ways to better understand and address health issues. Surveillance definitions will differ depending on a project’s purpose, the availability of resources, and the need to make comparisons among different groups. Public health surveillance provides critical information to understand the epidemiology of a newly emerging pathogen and to assess for the impact of a novel infection on society. Public health surveillance goals include:

- Understanding the natural history and impact, e.g., the spectrum of physical, social, and mental illness that results from infection.
- Identifying the epidemiologic characteristics of affected persons, e.g., demographics, underlying health conditions, occupational risk, geography.
- Conducting risk assessments, e.g., probability, consequence.
- Comparing incidence and prevalence estimates among jurisdictions and nationwide.
- Monitoring trends, e.g., incidence, prevalence, impact, epidemiology of affected persons.
- Identifying opportunities for interventions, e.g., primary, secondary, tertiary prevention.

It is important that uniform criteria, also known as a case definition, are agreed upon to enable the above activities. As with any other health condition, each jurisdiction must determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations, whether to require the reporting of Long COVID as a condition of public health significance. The authority for implementing disease reporting from health care providers to public health authorities can rest with state, tribal, territorial, and some local governments (CDC, 2023a). While no jurisdictions have made Long COVID reportable on an individual basis to public health authorities, many health departments have or may consider in the future conducting special surveillance or epidemiologic assessments of Long COVID in their jurisdiction. The 2024 NASEM definition of Long COVID will allow for implementation of a standard definition to be used for these purposes.

Early in the evolution of an epidemic or pandemic, especially if outcomes include severe illness, hospitalization, and death, it is important for public health surveillance to include all potential cases of a new disease to prevent further spread by enacting appropriate control measures. This inclusiveness, or high sensitivity, helps to ensure that the full range of possible presentations of a given condition is captured. However, like all conditions, this must be balanced with specificity to avoid diluting our understanding of a new condition by being too broad and including cases that do not truly belong.

For public health purposes, a case definition should be easy to apply consistently. The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition as proposed does not currently include a requirement for laboratory test evidence. This is due in part to known limitations in access to early testing that could have impacted some populations ability to access diagnostics, especially those with pre-existing difficulties accessing care. However, laboratory testing criteria might be added to the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition in implementation by researchers as previously discussed. And while it could potentially serve to augment surveillance, it is not necessarily required for all forms of surveillance activities.

Public health surveillance approaches to Long COVID should focus on monitoring trends, understanding the epidemiology of this condition (including identifying populations at risk), and assessing physical, mental, and social impact over time. Various methodologies, other than individual case reporting, have been used including cross sectional surveys, leveraging existing health care and administrative data sources (e.g., all payer databases, health information exchanges), modeling, sentinel surveillance, syndromic surveillance, or a combination of these approaches.

Jurisdictions may not have all the resources needed to completely implement all these surveillance activities. However, they may elect to still benefit from the consistency that the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition offers and begin to implement some, if not all, of these options. Considerations for jurisdictions seeking to implement the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition include the following:

- Legal landscape: Does the jurisdiction have the authority to require (or simply encourage/ask for) reporting?
- Technical landscape: Does the jurisdiction have the technical infrastructure necessary to implement surveys, electronic case reporting (ECR), health information exchange (HIE) extraction or message sharing, syndromic surveillance, sentinel surveillance, and modeling/forecasting?
- Educational landscape: What is the level of awareness and understanding of Long COVID among key stakeholders (e.g., the health care sector, public/community members, and/or elected officials)?
- Capacity landscape: Does the jurisdiction have funding support for the systems and personnel required to perform surveillance activities? If not, consider the cost of new systems (e.g., the Electronic Surveillance System for the Early Notification of Community-Based Epidemics, HIE) or the maintenance of existing systems. Also consider necessary support for training personnel to monitor and manage systems and results (e.g., control measures, action steps, etc.)

A WORKING DEFINITION AND RESEARCH AGENDA

The committee expects that the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition will evolve as new evidence emerges and our understanding of Long COVID continues to mature. The committee sought to be clear about the current understanding of Long COVID, and as one engagement participant commented, “Use this as an opportunity to be transparent about what we know and what we don’t know.” This is in line with lessons from defining other diseases such as HIV/AIDS, which took years and multiple iterations to define. Given the current pace of research, it is possible that the definition may need to be updated in no more than 3 years, and the reconsideration may benefit from a multidisciplinary approach. Other triggers for updating the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition could include the emergence of new treatments with clear benefits for patients identified by a refined definition of disease, the development of a new test, new evidence on prognosis, or the need to improve the clarity or precision of the definition (Doust et al., 2017).

Findings from the committee’s engagement process indicate the need to pair any new definition with a dissemination and education campaign to inform the public and key stakeholders. Furthermore, going forward, it may be valuable to have mechanisms in place for gauging how the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition is understood, how it is being used, what other elements need to be added, and whether it is being applied in a consistent and standardized way (e.g., assessment tools). A research agenda to improve the definition could focus on the key elements articulated earlier: attribution to infection, time, clinical features, equity, functional impairment, exclusions and alternative diagnoses, biomarkers and laboratory criteria, and risk factors. New evidence of the following may affect decisions to reconsider the definition:

- Improved testing to identify those who have been infected, even when tested weeks, months and years later. However, a large proportion of the population has been infected with COVID-19 at this point, and, as a result, finding control groups will become an increasing challenge in conducting research.
- Symptoms and organ damage that distinguish Long COVID from healthy people and other medical conditions.
- Onset and duration, including delayed onset of Long COVID after an ostensible period of recovery from acute infection.
- Recovery trajectory and natural history over longer periods of time.
- Presence and prevalence of co-morbid conditions.
- Biomarker(s) to diagnose Long COVID.
- Risk factors for Long COVID.
- Prevalence and outcomes of Long COVID by sex, gender, race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and other factors.
- Patterns in Long COVID among special populations such as older adults; children and adolescents; pregnant, lactating, and postpartum persons; people with disabilities; people experiencing homelessness; tribal communities; and imprisoned populations; among others.
- Longitudinal consequences (e.g., risk and development of other diseases, disability, hospitalization, and death).
- Effects on functionality and daily living, overall well-being, and caregivers and families.
- Social sciences research aimed at understanding the social and economic consequences of Long COVID.
- New treatment and management options that could potentially affect the sensitivity threshold and elements of the definition.

Ongoing and new research should lead to a more complete understanding of the natural history, etiology, therapy, and clinical management of Long COVID, and this enriched knowledge may prompt reconsideration of the definition of Long COVID.

SHORTCOMINGS IN THE AVAILABLE EVIDENCE

Research on Long COVID has been complicated due to heterogeneous study methods and lack of common data elements (e.g., different terms to describe the same symptom or condition) (Deer et al., 2021). Currently, most studies are among people with documented evidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection, which omits some who have been infected but have gone untested or had a false negative result. Differences in test availability and access could have affected the populations selected for these investigations. Time factors in studies were quite heterogenous—for example, how long people had to be sick before being included in a study, when they were assessed during a study, and the total follow-up period—which made it difficult to synthesize data. Furthermore, when the vast majority of people have been infected with SARS-CoV-2, it is difficult to create a valid, uninfected control group.

Additionally, it seems few studies were adjusted for duration of illness when analyzing or interpreting results. Some studies lasted years, some only followed up for months to 1 year, and it was not clear if those who may have “recovered” were still followed to see if they had relapsed. Scientific studies take time and often confirm patterns that patients and clinicians may already be aware of. On the other hand, patient and clinician reports are usually not systematically gathered, and what appear to be common or prominent findings may appear different after more data are collected. Because the very nature of Long COVID requires evaluation over time, additional information and knowledge will continue to emerge, as will opportunities to document and understand the natural history of Long COVID.

LIMITATIONS AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF THE DEFINITION

The committee confronted many difficulties in its efforts to define Long COVID including:

- Varying working definitions and terminology used in studies that attempt to characterize Long COVID.
- The tradeoffs of a broad definition and effects of this broad definition on the IACC field.
- A lack of confirmatory tests for SARS-CoV-2 infection.
- Tests with limited performance characteristics (i.e., sensitivity, specificity).
- Changes in test types (e.g., shift from PCR to antigen tests, especially to those self-administered at home and not typically reported to public health authorities).
- Varying levels of access to diagnostic tests across the population at different times in the pandemic response.
- The social and cultural factors that can impact individuals’ ability and decisions to seek health care and therefore ultimately impact who is diagnosed, managed and studied for acute infections as well as Long COVID (e.g., cost, economic ability to sustain a work absence, family care obligations, etc.).
- The inescapable circularity of relying on symptoms to define Long COVID and using the definition to indicate what symptoms are attributable to Long COVID.
- Striking the right balance between recognizing wide susceptibility to Long COVID while also acknowledging evidence of differential host risk factors (such as higher risk for women, those with multiple previous infections, or more severe prior infection).
- Understanding that for certain purposes (such as many research projects or public health surveillance), selection criteria that are more restrictive than the overall definition will be needed to characterize the target population.
- The reality of the unknown pathophysiologic mechanisms that are inherent to any new condition and that will ideally be further elucidated as more time passes.
- Limitations in the evidence base, as described above.

Disease definition is an essential tool in health care that aids diagnosis, treatment, and research; it also has implications for access to supportive services post diagnosis. Throughout its deliberations, the committee sought to define Long COVID while simultaneously recognizing that there is more to learn and understand about it, and this means acknowledging inherent limitations and anticipating that changes will be made as the science advances. Particularly, the absence of an independent diagnostic standard for Long COVID, such as a definitive biomarker, is a noteworthy limitation. In any current effort to define Long COVID, there is an unavoidable circularity in using symptoms to define Long COVID and then relying on the definition to recognize characteristic symptoms. If SARS-CoV-2 had infected just one-tenth of one percent of the population, there could be the same proportional increase in Long COVID, but it would likely never have been recognized as such, lost in the background noise of similar IACCs with uncertain etiology. The present exercise to develop a definition is feasible because SARS-CoV-2 infected such a large number of persons and was followed by an upsurge in multiple chronic symptoms among those who had experienced infection. This strong temporal association lends confidence to the pathobiological, clinical, personal, and social reality of Long COVID. However, in the absence of a highly sensitive and perfectly specific biomarker, the edges of inclusion and exclusion remain fuzzy: patients with a newly developed condition, such as diabetes, may have it attributed, rightly or wrongly, to Long COVID, while other patients with a single, persisting symptom, such as headache, that is due to Long COVID may fail to be properly diagnosed because there are many other possible causes of that symptom. Over time, with growing knowledge of the epidemiology and etiology of Long COVID and especially with the advent of one or more definitive biomarkers, the probability of both erroneous exclusion and erroneous inclusion will diminish.

CONCLUDING REMARKS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The committee hopes the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition will, first and foremost, benefit the Long COVID community by creating a shared understanding of what Long COVID is and that it will lend added recognition to IACCs within the medical community and society at large. The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition reflects and promotes a more holistic and integrated approach to understanding disease. Such an approach reflects a broader recognition of the complexities inherent in human health, including health disparities, social determinants of health, and the importance of including patient experience and knowledge in decision making. Furthermore, the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition recognizes the heterogeneity and complexity of Long COVID presentations and how Long COVID can affect individuals in multiple and profound ways.

Through a synthesis of current research, multidisciplinary clinical insights, and patient perspectives, the committee attempted to unravel the complexities of Long COVID and to define Long COVID in a way that can serve a range of needs. In support of its definition, the committee puts forth three recommendations about the adoption, implementation, and updating of the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition.

Recommendations

RECOMMENDATION 1. Adopt and Implement the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition.

The federal government, state, tribal, local, and territorial health authorities; clinical societies and associations; public health practitioners; clinicians; payers; researchers; drug industry; employers; educators; international organizations; and patients should adopt the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition and should use the term Long COVID. The 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition is intended to be applied to many purposes, but the committee notes that there is flexibility within the broad definition, for example, to restrict research eligibility to a subset of Long COVID patients.

RECOMMENDATION 2. Promulgate and Monitor the Implementation of the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition.

The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health’s Office of Long COVID Research and Practice and the Long COVID Coordination Council should lead the coordination and collaboration efforts across federal, state, tribal, local, and territorial agencies and other relevant entities, including international organizations, in the wide dissemination and implementation of the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition. Such implementation efforts should:

- Give special attention to the definition’s equity implications to maximize appropriate inclusion.
- Develop standardized communication for key stakeholders and the public about the revised definition and understanding of Long COVID.
- Empirically test the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition; monitor, evaluate, and identify barriers to implementation and adoption of the definition in research and in practice (including supporting an individual’s ability to apply for and receive Social Security disability benefits) that may be improved in future revisions.
- Develop a standard protocol for screening and diagnosing patients with Long COVID in clinical settings and enhance clinical education and training on infection-associated chronic conditions.
- Catalogue and summarize the application of the definition in research settings and identify sub-phenotypes of Long COVID that inform the need for further investigation across the translational research spectrum from discovery to delivery science.
- Take advantage of a unique opportunity to learn from epidemiologic surveillance of an infection-associated chronic condition and support, for example, improved data infrastructure, technologic and legal support for more efficient cross-jurisdictional information-sharing, and improved test types and access to testing.
- Continue to listen to and collaborate with the Long COVID community to learn from lived experience.

RECOMMENDATION 3. Update the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition.

In no more than 3 years or when triggered by the emergence of relevant new knowledge, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health’s Office of Long COVID Research and Practice should convene a multi-disciplinary group, including individuals with lived experience, to reexamine and update the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition set forth in this report. The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health’s Office of Long COVID Research and Practice should put into place the necessary infrastructure, policies, and mechanisms to support and prepare for future updates to the 2024 NASEM Long COVID Definition, including a process to track and assess new scientific knowledge that may inform the definition.
