Abstract
Post-COVID conditions, also termed “long COVID,” are a heterogeneous set of conditions persisting greater than 28 days after initial infection. These conditions, which include fatigue, brain fog, orthostatic intolerance, and pain, are a significant source of morbidity and limited function worldwide. Nonetheless, both the pathophysiology and treatment of long COVID remain poorly understood. Several pathophysiologic mechanisms have been proposed including neuro-inflammatory drivers, endothelial dysfunction, neurotransmitter dysregulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, autonomic dysfunction, and central sensitization. In this article, we present a conceptual framework for evaluation of long COVID symptoms, as well as the evidence behind their proposed pathophysiologic mechanisms. Patients may struggle with one or more of the proposed mechanisms listed above, and the contributions from each process may vary depending on the patient. Although no FDA-approved therapies exist for long COVID, we review several potential promising and mechanistically plausible therapies.

Post-COVID conditions, also termed “long COVID,” are characterized by the presence of persistent function-limiting symptoms at least greater than 28 days after initial COVID infection. These symptoms, which can include fatigue, brain fog, orthostatic intolerance, and pain, are a significant source of morbidity, affecting up to 65 billion patients worldwide with an economic impact of an estimated 17 billion in the USA. Long COVID can be profoundly function-limiting, resulting in decreased patient quality of life and ability to perform job functions. Nonetheless, both the pathophysiology and treatment of long COVID remain poorly understood. Routine cardiopulmonary testing, neuroimaging, and laboratory inflammatory markers are not sensitive or specific in establishing a diagnosis of long COVID. There are no FDA-approved therapies for post-COVID conditions. Large-scale trials on therapies are limited and, to date, negative, and information on long-term prognosis after developing long COVID is nonexistent. Therefore, post-COVID care tends to be limited, fragmented, and results in frustration for physicians and patients.

Molecular imaging techniques, such as PET CT, SPECT CT, and functional MRI, have all shown hypometabolic signals in patients with post-COVID conditions when compared to asymptomatic controls. Specifically, PET CT signals corresponding to long COVID symptoms have been identified in multiple brain regions including olfactory gyrus, limbic, and paralimbic brain regions. Taken together, these data suggest altered neurologic processing as a driver for post-COVID symptoms.

Several pathophysiologic mechanisms have been proposed including neuroinflammatory drivers, endothelial dysfunction, neurotransmitter dysregulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, autonomic dysfunction, and central sensitization. In this article, we will review mechanisms underlying long COVID symptoms, along with potential therapies directed toward those mechanisms. We are hopeful that this conceptual framework will aid clinicians in diagnosing, counseling, and treating patients struggling with long COVID symptoms.

Neuroinflammatory
Initial infection with the SARS-CoV-2 virus is associated with a pro-inflammatory response. After infection, the SARS-CoV-2 virus binds with the receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), resulting in downregulation of ACE2 expression, which triggers a cascade of molecular events that include the release of multiple pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1-beta, interleukin-6, interleukin-8, and TNF-alpha. The resulting hyperinflammatory response seen in acute COVID infection can cause respiratory distress, multiorgan failure, and death. Importantly, the enhanced cytokine release may damage neural tissue vis-à-vis inappropriate microglial activation, dopaminergic neuronal senescence, and loss of hippocampal neurogenesis.

Patients struggling with long COVID have exhibited similar patterns in pro-inflammatory cytokine elevations long after initial COVID-19 infection, with persistent increases in CCL11, interleukin-6, interleukin 1-beta, and tumor necrosis factor alpha. In addition, COVID-19 infection has been associated with ACE2 autoantibody development, which may cause ongoing ACE2 downregulation and activation of the pro-inflammatory cytokine cascade. Moreover, patients struggling with long COVID have shown long-term dysregulation of T cell responses, altered T and B cell responses to inflammatory stimuli, alterations in leukocyte cytokine signatures, and altered levels of exhausted CD4+ T cells. Taken together, these data suggest that persistent alterations in the immune response and in inflammatory cytokine signaling are present in patients who struggle with long COVID and may be directly related to the development of post-COVID sequelae including fatigue and brain fog. Indeed, low dose naltrexone (LDN), which may have anti-inflammatory effects through microglial stabilization, has been implicated in several studies as a potential therapeutic agent for long COVID patients. In addition, before the COVID-19 pandemic, LDN has been shown to be effective in decreasing inflammation and symptoms in fibromyalgia and ME/CFS.

Persistence of SARS-CoV-2, even long after recovery from initial COVID infection, has been hypothesized as a potential neuroinflammatory driver for long COVID symptoms. One study estimated that high viral loads may last for at least 60 days in up to 0.5% of COVID infections. And SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA has been detected as long as 4 months after initial infection in a variety of different solid tissues, including liver, kidney, stomach, intestine, brain, blood vessels, lung, breast, skin and thyroid. These fragments have been found even in patients who recovered from mild COVID-19 infection, and higher virus copy numbers may correlate with an increased risk of developing long COVID. As a result, antiviral therapies, such as Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir plus ritonavir), have been trialed for long COVID treatment. While anecdotal case reports have suggested benefit in some patients, a recent randomized controlled trial did not show any improvement in post-COVID symptoms after a 15-day course of Paxlovid. One possible explanation for the disappointing results is not having a long enough treatment period, which the current NIH RECOVER-VITAL trial intends to evaluate by extending the treatment of Paxlovid to 25 days. However, it is possible that the persistence of virus is in the form of non-replicating particles that trigger an immune response but do not replicate, and thus are not amenable to treatment by antivirals.

Vascular dysfunction
One of the key theories behind the development of Long COVID is that of endothelial dysfunction. Endothelial reactivity has been found to be decreased in patients with Long COVID using techniques such as reactive hyperemia peripheral arterial tonometry (RH-PAT). Biomarkers of endothelial injury including endothelin 1 (ET-1), angiopoietin-1, and p-selectin have been found to be elevated and angiopoietin-2 levels have been decreased in patients with Long COVID. The vasoconstrictor peptide ET-1 has been found to be elevated in both PASC-F and ME/CFS but was not associated with a measurable change in RH-PAT. Current evidence shows that endothelial cells can be persistently activated by both the spike and nucleocapsid proteins which can be persistent in macrophages in patients with Long COVID. This supports the observation that it may be viral particles triggering long COVID endothelial cell dysfunction, not active replicating virus.

Endothelial dysfunction generally is associated with decreased nitric oxide (NO) production and intravascular availability secondary to increased consumption. This may be due to decreased activity of the endothelial nitric oxide synthetase which generates NO from L-arginine with resulting production of L-citrulline. The amino acid profile in patients with Long COVID shows low levels of L-arginine with high levels of ornithine with a high ornithine/L-citrulline ratio, with these changes correlating with symptom prevalence and burden. This pattern of low L-arginine high ornithine is very similar to findings in acute COvid-19 in both adults and children. Pseudovirus studies have shown that S-protein may downregulate mitochondrial function, endothelial NO synthase (eNOS), and increase glycolysis via ACE-2 downregulation. Previous studies replacing L-arginine have shown benefit in symptom burden through increasing serum arginine levels in patients with PASC at 28 days, which positively correlated with hand grip strength and flow mediated dilation. Other studies in acute COVID-19 have demonstrated decrease in the proinflammatory cytokine profile with L-arginine replacement while reinforcing
the immunometabolic interplay between small molecules such as L-arginine and the immune response. A second area that has gained significant interest is that of amyloid-fibrin aggregates commonly referred to by the misnomer ‘microclots.’ This is based on the finding that plasma samples from patients with Long COVID contained amyloid deposits that were resistant to trypsinolysis. Further analysis of these deposits identified high levels of inflammatory mediators including α2-antiplasmin, fibrinogen, platelet factor 4, von Willebrand factor, and serum amyloid A. However, these particles were not unique to long COVID and also appeared in patients with acute COVID-19 and diabetes mellitus type 2, which may imply that they are a marker of inflammation. Patients admitted to the intensive care unit have been found to have elevated levels of these amyloid-fibrin aggregates, and their presence has been associated with increased risk of disseminated intravascular coagulation as well as 28-day mortality. Patients with long COVID were also found to have increased platelet activation, which may contribute to these aggregates. This data however has not translated into clinical practice as while triple anticoagulant therapy has been proposed as a treatment option, there are no published trials to support either safety or efficacy of this approach.

Neurotransmitter dysregulation
Serotonin, or 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), has complex physiological functions within the human body, including important modulatory effects on behavior, mood, and memory. Similarly, dysregulation of 5-HT has been associated with increased irritability, brain fog, and decreased energy. Long COVID symptoms have been associated with 5-HT reduction, potentially through decreased tryptophan absorption, which may lead to decreased 5-HT production. Fluvoxamine, an SSRI with anti-inflammatory effects, has been shown to decrease the risk of clinical deterioration after COVID-19 infection, and small randomized controlled trials have demonstrated that early fluvoxamine treatment during COVID infection may decrease post-COVID fatigue. Direct production through 5-HT agonists could theoretically help with the dysregulation associated with long COVID. Pharmaceutical grade 5-HT agonists (lorcaserin) were recently removed from the market, and although supplements such as psilocybin are often taken by patients and have been described as mediating symptoms in long COVID larger trials are needed.

Beyond serotonin, other neurotransmitters such as glutamate, norepinephrine, acetylcholine, and dopamine, have been implicated in the pathogenesis of long COVID. The SARS-CoV-2 virus appears to affect dopamine production in laboratory models of dopaminergic neurons, and COVID infection may induce dopaminergic neuron senescence. Reduced dopamine levels, in turn, can lead to anhedonia, fatigue, and increases in brain fog. Also, the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein demonstrates affinity to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, suggesting that COVID may have effects on cholinergic transmission and ultimately may contribute to long COVID cognitive and mood impairments. Finally, metabolomics analyses of patients with long COVID symptoms have revealed an increase in glutamine/glutamate ratio, which may impair energy metabolism; disruptions in glutamate levels may also cause neurocognitive symptoms including cognitive deficits. In fact, one hypothesis behind long COVID related brain fog involves disruption of glutamate regulation, which may be related to astrocyte dysfunction and subsequently cognitive fatigue symptoms.

Mitochondrial dysfunction
One of the most puzzling, misunderstood, and difficult to treat symptoms seen in patients with long COVID is that of fatigue with post exertional malaise (PEM). PEM is defined as a flare in symptoms or new symptoms after exertion which typically occurs after a characteristic 24 hour delay. The etiology of PEM is not clear but several studies of patients with long COVID who have PEM have been found to have decreased VO2max on VO2 testing. Furthermore, on more invasive testing, the reduction in peak VO2 has been associated with reduced oxygen extraction in the periphery as measured by the difference between arterial oxygen content and mixed venous oxygen content. Changes in muscle structure have also been noted in patients with long COVID which include decreased cross-sectional area of muscle fibers, decreased content of mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase, increased proportion of type II glycolytic fibers which are highly fatigable. Comparatively, muscle biopsy samples from patients with long COVID have lower expression of citrate synthase and mitochondrial complexes when compared to that of healthy controls. Additionally, muscle biopsy samples from patients with long COVID also demonstrated decreased mitochondrial RNA activity and expression as well as decreased mitochondrial respiration as measured by high-resolution respirometry.

When patients were exposed to exercise, those with PEM had worsening of their oxidative phosphorylation capacity along with a decrease in succinate dehydrogenase activity one day after exercise which was not seen in healthy controls. Metabolomic studies demonstrate increased metabolites related to glycolysis and decreased levels of metabolites involved in oxidative phosphorylation, particularly in muscle tissue of patients with Long COVID and PEM, implying decreased functional activity of mitochondria in these patients. Further, after exercise, there was an increase in amyloid deposition in the muscle tissue of patients with long COVID accompanied by an exercise induced myopathy with muscle fiber atrophy and necrosis identified on histologic section accompanied by increased infiltration of CD3, CD68, and CD20 positive lymphocytes and impaired muscle regeneration with abnormal new muscle fibers. Together, this data suggests mitochondrial dysfunction in patients with long COVID which leads to impaired energy generation. This highlights the potentially harmful impact of exercise in those long COVID patients with PEM as evidenced by the immune mediated myopathy. While there is no current therapeutic available for PEM, this data supports pacing which is the avoidance of situations that trigger PEM. A large multicenter NIH clinical trial (RECOVER-ENERGIZE) is evaluating long COVID participants who are exercise intolerant and have PEM with pacing.

Dysautonomia
The autonomic nervous system controls the involuntary physiologic processes of digestion, heart rate, blood pressure, and respiration. The system is divided into three distinct systems: the sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric nervous systems. The sympathetic nervous system classically generates the “fight, flight, or freeze” response, with resulting increases in heart rate, cardiac output, peripheral vasoconstriction, and central vasodilation. The parasympathetic nervous system, mediated chiefly through the vagus nerve, is associated with “rest and digest” responses that counteract sympathetic activation, in terms of reducing cardiac conduction and increasing cardiac relaxation, all resulting in decreased heart rate and peripheral vasodilation. Finally, the enteric nervous system is chiefly responsible for mediating motility with the gastrointestinal tract.

Patients who have struggled with long COVID commonly endorse dysautonomic symptoms including orthostasis, increased tachycardia and exertional intolerance, and nausea. COMPASS-31 questionnaire scores, which is a measure of autonomic symptoms, are elevated in patients struggling with post-COVID conditions when compared with healthy controls. Patients with long COVID demonstrate heart rate variability at rest and with deep breathing, which is a proxy for cardiac autonomic dysfunction. Not surprisingly, diagnoses of postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) are more common in long COVID patients than in the general population. These symptoms appear to be mediated by vagus nerve dysfunction, sympathetic hyperactivity, and abnormalities of the enteric nervous system. There is evidence that the vagal nerve is thickened (as measured by ultrasound) in long COVID patients (compared to controls), which suggests that structural alterations could be a contributing factor to dysautonomia symptoms. Altogether, dysautonomia appears to be a primary driver of long COVID symptoms, particularly orthostatic intolerance.

Several therapies targeted toward dysautonomic symptoms work by either by decreasing sympathetic drive or increasing parasympathetic tone. Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS), biofeedback, and acupuncture, all of which increase parasympathetic drive, have been implicated as potential treatments for post-COVID symptoms. Medications such as guanfacine, which have central sympatholytic effects, have also been investigated, along with stellate ganglion blocks, which may result in anti-sympathetic effects. Combination of sympatholytic medications (e.g. guanfacine) with approaches that improve parasympathetic tone (VNS) may be a synergistic approach utilizing two different mechanisms of action.

Central sensitization
Central sensitization, as defined by the International Association for the Study of Pain, refers to “increased responsiveness of nociceptive neurons in the CNS to their normal or subthreshold input.” Patients with central sensitization may struggle with increased pain sensitivity, allodynia, dysesthesia, sensory acuity, and medication sensitivities. Central sensitization has been implicated in many chronic pain conditions including fibromyalgia, chronic musculoskeletal back pain, temporomandibular joint disorders, chronic headache, chronic osteoarthritis, and visceral pain hypersensitivity syndromes. Many of these disorders elevate the risk of developing long COVID, and central sensitization phenotypes such as widespread pain have been described in a subset of patients with post-COVID symptoms. A significant proportion of patients with long COVID have elevated central sensitization inventory (CSI) scores, indicating potential overlap between patients with long COVID and central sensitization.

The definition for central sensitization provides potential mechanistic explanations for sensory sensitivities, increased pain symptoms, and medication intolerances in patients with long COVID. However, many patients with post-COVID conditions struggle with fatigue, brain fog, and orthostatic intolerance, which are less likely to be mediated through nociceptive neuronal modulation. Moreover, the central sensitization construct recognizes traditional concepts surrounding chronic pain, namely increased brain activation in response to pain and decreased CNS level inhibition of pain signals. Sensory sensitivities may also be explained by enhanced depolarization of nerve membranes by increased levels of local cytokines. These changes are generally suggestive of local inflammation which also mediates increased levels of neurotropic factors such as nerve derived growth factor, in turn leading to increased nerve fiber density in tissues.

Ultimately, central sensitization appears to be associated with long COVID symptoms, particularly pain and sensory sensitivities. In these patients, neuromodulatory medications such as duloxetine, tricyclic antidepressants, and pregabalin may improve symptoms. However, several of these medications may worsen the concomitant symptoms of fatigue and brain fog in patients with long COVID. As understanding of the underlying pathophysiologic changes of long COVID and other complex chronic conditions continue to evolve, it is likely that these will explain the construct of central sensitization, but with targetable pathways that may lead to better treatments and outcomes.

Conclusions
We present a conceptual framework to summarize major categories of pathophysiological mechanisms that may contribute to the development of long COVID. Persistent inflammation of neural tissue, such as through pro-inflammatory cytokine release and development of autoantibodies, likely plays a role in multiple symptoms. Similarly, dysregulation of neurotransmitter transduction, disruption of autonomic system function, endothelial dysfunction, peripheral mitochondrial dysfunction, and central sensitization may all contribute to the pathogenesis of different long COVID symptoms. This framework should provide a tool for counseling for patients struggling with long COVID. Moreover, while no FDA-approved therapies exist for post-COVID symptoms, this framework may indicate low-risk, mechanistically plausible therapeutic targets. Of note, a recent study in a long COVID clinic outlined multiple medications discussed in this paper, including low-dose naltrexone, and vagal nerve stimulation, which were rated as helpful by patients.

Ultimately, the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying long COVID are heterogeneous, complex, and remain incompletely understood. Patients may struggle with one or more of the proposed mechanisms listed above, and the contributions from each process may vary depending on the patient. Moreover, certain processes, such as central sensitization, may contribute to some, but not all long COVID symptoms. As our understanding of long COVID increases, we hope that new diagnostic tests will advance our understanding of long COVID and its treatments.

Based on the available evidence, it appears that neuroinflammation may act as a unifying theme for the various mechanisms of long COVID. Neurotransmitter dysregulation, dysautonomia, and central sensitization may result from pro-inflammatory effects on neural tissue. Similarly, mitochondrial dysfunction may stem from direct inflammatory damage to muscle, and endothelial dysfunction may function as a response to a pro-inflammatory molecular milieu. Consequently, anti-inflammatory therapies might eventually prove effective for treating numerous long COVID symptoms.

Table 1: Proposed mechanisms for long COVID.

Row 1 of "Table 1: Proposed mechanisms for long COVID" below:
Mechanism: Neuroinflammation
Pathophysiology: Elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines in multiple tissues with activation of glial cells and neurons. Increased activity of T-cell and B-cell subsets, exhaustion of cd4+ T-cells. Viral particle persistence, particularly within macrophages may be an inciting factor.
Clinical Correlates: May explain both neurologic and peripheral pathophysiology. Immune mediated pathways identified as contributory to all the pathways below, whether by cytokine signaling, local inflammation, or senescent changes.
Potential treatments: Nirmaltrelvir-ritonavir trial was negative at 15 days. A current 25-day treatment trial is ongoing. New trial with baricitinib (JAK1 and JAK2 inhibitor). Anecdotal reports of benefit with monoclonal antibody preparations.

Row 2 of "Table 1: Proposed mechanisms for long COVID" below:
Mechanism: Vascular dysfunction
Pathophysiology: Elevated vascular inflammatory markers including endothelin-1. Decreased endothelial reactivity by arterial tonometry. Decreased nitric oxide production. Decreased L-arginine, high L-ornithine. Increased prevalence of amyloid–fibrin aggregates.
Clinical Correlates: Vascular reactivity may be associated with Raynaud’s phenomenon and delayed capillary refill. Vasospasm may be associated with chest pain. There is no clear correlate between amyloid–fibrin aggregates and any symptoms of long COVID.
Potential treatments: L-arginine and Vitamin C associated with reduced symptoms in one study. Potential benefit for vasodilators such as amlodipine in Raynaud’s phenomenon.

Row 3 of "Table 1: Proposed mechanisms for long COVID" below:
Mechanism: Neurotransmitter dysregulation
Pathophysiology: Decreased serotonin levels (perhaps secondary to decreased tryptophan absorption). Dopaminergic neuron senescence and decreased cerebral dopamine levels. Decreased acetylcholine activity at nicotinic receptors. Decreased glutamate activity.
Clinical Correlates: Decreased levels of serotonin, dopamine, acetylcholine, and glutamate activity could lead to depression, anhedonia, and decreased cognitive function.
Potential treatments: SSRIs, e.g., fluoxetine and fluvoxamine. 5-HT agonists, e.g., lorcaserin (off market). Psilocybin (controlled substance). To our knowledge, agonists of acetylcholine, dopamine, and glutamate receptors have not been trialed.

Row 4 of "Table 1: Proposed mechanisms for long COVID" below:
Mechanism: Mitochondrial dysfunction
Pathophysiology: Decreased functioning of mitochondria both in oxygen production via oxidative phosphorylation as well as detoxification of free radicals.
Clinical Correlates: Decreased functioning likely leads to reduced energy production and decreased VO₂max seen in patients with post-exertional malaise (PEM). Decreased free radical detoxification likely associated with PEM crash.
Potential treatments: Pacing. Small frequent meals. Mitochondrial support with free radical scavengers and metabolic essentials, e.g., coenzyme Q10, N-acetyl cysteine, nicotinamide ribonucleoside.

Row 5 of "Table 1: Proposed mechanisms for long COVID" below:
Mechanism: Dysautonomia
Pathophysiology: Impaired functioning of the autonomic nervous system leading to tachycardia, orthostatic intolerance, nausea.
Clinical Correlates: May explain postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) and gastrointestinal symptoms. Evidence of both sympathetic hyperactivity and vagus nerve dysfunction.
Potential treatments: Sympatholytics: β-blockers, e.g., propranolol; α-blockers, e.g., guanfacine. Parasympathetic activation: vagus nerve stimulator. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, e.g., pyridostigmine.

Row 6 of "Table 1: Proposed mechanisms for long COVID" below:
Mechanism: Central sensitization
Pathophysiology: Increased responsiveness of nociceptive neurons in the central nervous system to their normal or subthreshold input.
Clinical Correlates: May explain disproportionate pain and sensory sensitivity but does not explain fatigue or dysautonomia.
Potential treatments: SNRIs, e.g., duloxetine. TCAs, e.g., amitriptyline. Gabapentinoids, e.g., pregabalin.