Abstract
Long COVID is a debilitating, multisystemic illness following a SARS-CoV-2 infection whose duration may be indefinite. Over four years into the pandemic, little knowledge has been generated from clinical trials. We analyzed the information available on ClinicalTrials.gov, and found that the rigor and focus of trials vary widely, and that the majority test non-pharmacological interventions with insufficient evidence. We highlight promising trials underway, and encourage the proliferation of clinical trials for treating Long COVID and other infection-associated chronic conditions and illnesses (IACCIs). We recommend several guidelines for Long COVID trials: First, pharmaceutical trials with potentially curative, primary interventions should be prioritized, and both drug repurposing and new drug development should be pursued. Second, study designs should be both rigorous and accessible, e.g., triple-blinded randomized trials that can be conducted remotely, without participants needing to leave their homes. Third, studies should have multiple illness comparator cohorts for IACCIs such as myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME/CFS) and dysautonomia, and screen for the full spectrum of symptomatology and pathologies of these illnesses. Fourth, studies should consider inclusion/exclusion criteria with an eye towards equity and breadth of representation, including participants of all races, ethnicities, and genders most impacted by COVID-19, and including all levels of illness severity. Fifth, involving patient-researchers in all aspects of studies brings immensely valuable perspectives that will increase the impact of trials. We also encourage the development of efficient clinical trial designs including methods to study several therapies in parallel.

1. Introduction
Long COVID (LC) is a debilitating, multisystemic illness that follows a SARS-CoV-2 infection and whose duration may be indefinite. It is defined by The National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine as “an infection-associated chronic condition that occurs after SARS-CoV-2 infection and is present for at least 3 months as a continuous, relapsing and remitting, or progressive disease state that affects one or more organ systems.” Long COVID is heterogeneous, impacts multiple organ systems, and can include over 200 symptoms. A 2020 Patient-Led Research Collaborative survey of 3762 participants found that people with Long COVID experienced an average of 55.9 symptoms across 9.1 organ systems. Common symptoms include brain fog, fatigue, autonomic dysfunction, headache, gastrointestinal symptoms, menstrual cycle impacts, and palpitations; common new-onset conditions include myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS), dysautonomia (e.g., postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, or POTS), diabetes, neuropathy, sleep disorders, and both minor and major vascular events including strokes and heart attacks. Post-exertional malaise (PEM), the worsening of or appearance of new symptoms after even minimal exertion is often observed; although it is often called a symptom is a physiological state. Long COVID mechanisms and pathologies that have been identified include viral persistence, immune system dysfunctions, nervous system dysfunction (including autonomic), mitochondrial and metabolic dysfunctions, organ damage, neuroinflammation and reduced cerebral blood flow, microclotting and thrombosis, and reactivated latent infections. More research is needed to understand which of the pathologies are upstream or downstream of each other: for example, microclots are thought to cause widespread oxygen deprivation at the small vessel level, which could lead to neurological and mitochondrial dysfunction, causing reduced cerebral blood flow; and recent research showed transferring IgG antibodies from people with Long COVID to mice induced Long COVID in mice, strengthening the role of autoimmunity. Many of the identified pathologies could be explained by a persisting viral reservoir, though more research is needed to create tools to find reservoirs, particularly outside of the blood.

As of April 2024, 6.9% of US adults (about 17.8 million people) currently have Long COVID. Notably, 5.6% of all US adults report experiencing activity limitations due to Long COVID. Long COVID disproportionately affects women, transgender, and gender diverse individuals (TGD), as well as Hispanic and multiracial individuals. Premenopausal women have an elevated risk, suggesting key roles for sex hormones in the etiopathogenesis of Long COVID. There is a long history of underinvestment in studying treatments for chronic illnesses that disproportionately affect women, especially those without a diagnostic biomarker, like Long COVID. Further, there is a paucity of research on the health of TGD people, and their meaningful inclusion has implications for treatments and clinical trial design, including ensuring that questions to identify TGD are present, and that study materials are culturally competent and inclusive of TGD populations. Long COVID commonly leads to and co-occurs with other complex chronic illnesses such as ME/CFS and dysautonomia, and there is an opportunity for Long COVID research to build upon knowledge on infection-associated chronic conditions and illnesses (IACCIs) to better understand their shared features, mechanistic overlaps, and treatment.

Over four years into the pandemic, relatively little knowledge on Long COVID has been generated from clinical trials, with much of the existing data being from small investigative studies and case series (e.g. on anticoagulants, monoclonal antibodies, antivirals, and other treatments). Patient-generated data has highlighted treatments that patients with Long COVID are trying, including survey evidence demonstrating that pacing was most helpful, unpublished collected data by a pharmacist patient showing perceived benefits of a wide variety of treatments (including nattokinase, serrapeptase, and lumbrokinase), and a patient-led case series of 13 outcomes and experiences of Long COVID patients who trialed extended courses of Paxlovid. Additionally, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), National Center for Advancing Translational Science (NCATS), and the Critical Path Institute collaborated with patient organizations to establish and launch the CURE ID treatment survey, with the goal of identifying repurposed drugs for Long COVID. In the absence of known causal mechanisms, collating data from even a subset of the ongoing millions of patients who are trying a variety of options to treat their illnesses can enable the academic community to identify promising drugs and classes of drugs for clinical trials, exclude those that do not appear promising, and help provide evidence for and against mechanistic hypotheses. We and others have demonstrated the importance and impact of partnering with patients in all aspects of research and clinical trials.

Given the wide-ranging and severe impacts of Long COVID, it is imperative that Long COVID research advances towards clinical trials and therapeutics. First, we must identify priority treatments and best practices for study design, done in meaningful partnership with patients. While there has been significant research characterizing the symptomatology of Long COVID, and there is ongoing research on phenotypes and disease mechanisms, research has not yet answered the following key questions: a) what treatments improve the health of people with Long COVID, and b) who is most likely to benefit from them? Clinical trials that are designed in partnership with patients are critical to confirm the existing understanding of the drivers of Long COVID, better elucidate the details of such drivers, and generate efficacy data about treatment options that improve quality of life.

We describe the current landscape of Long COVID clinical trials, suggest how to make trials more accessible, and make study design recommendations. While these recommendations are primarily for trials with adult participants, many children also have Long COVID and many of these considerations apply to pediatric trials.

2. The current landscape of long COVID clinical trials
We analyzed the information available on ClinicalTrials.gov – the main website where all US government-funded clinical trials must be registered and where many other clinical trials choose to register – specifically for trials where the condition was listed as “Long COVID,” “Post-COVID Syndrome,” “Post-COVID-19 Syndrome,” or “Post-Acute Sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 Infection.” As of April 17, 2024, a total of 351 interventional clinical trials registered on ClinicalTrials.gov meet this criteria, but the majority were testing non-pharmaceutical, low quality interventions. For example, research focusing on psychological or wellness-based interventions to address Long COVID lack sufficient evidence and are unlikely to substantially improve quality of life. Given limited resources, we urge those designing and funding trials to focus on pharmaceutical interventions, particularly those with potentially curative pharmaceutical interventions that directly address the biological mechanisms of Long COVID. The most common interventional trial status was recruiting and many were not yet enrolling.

Among all registered Long COVID trials, 74.4% used a parallel model, while 57 used a single group design that does not allow for comparisons between arms. Less than half of the registered clinical trials had double-, triple-, or quadruple-blinded methodologies, i.e. methodologies that were sufficiently well-controlled to identify a causal effect; 129 trials were not blinded and 71 had only single blinding. Notably, only 38% of all Long COVID trials registered use both a parallel model and were also double-, triple-, or quadruple-blinded, and therefore have the potential to generate sufficient quality evidence to affect clinical care.

Graded exercise therapy (GET), therapy that deliberately increases physical activity over time, has been demonstrated to be harmful to people with ME/CFS, which occurs in about half of people with Long COVID. Therefore, GET studies should be avoided. Across all arms of all Long COVID trials in ClinicalTrials.gov, the words “training,” “exercise,” and “rehabilitation” were three of the top five words used to describe clinical trial interventions. Because ME/CFS and PEM are not covered in most medical schools, and there is substantial effort and nuance required to accurately identify PEM, the use of this language suggests that a number of ongoing trials may involve GET, which would have a substantial risk of worsening participants' conditions for those who experience PEM. It is possible that some of these trials involve PEM-informed rehabilitation performed by well-trained staff.

Several ongoing clinical trials are studying interventions that may provide significant insight into mechanistic Long COVID hypotheses. Viral persistence is one of the most active areas, with four Phase 2 randomized controlled trials of the SARS-CoV-2 antiviral nirmatrelvir/ritonavir, a trial of the SARS-CoV-2 antiviral ensitrelvir, a trial of SARS-CoV-2 monoclonal antibodies, and a trial of the HIV antivirals emtricitabine-tenofovir and maraviroc. In the pediatric population, there is a trial of larazotide, which tightens junctions in the gut lining and prevents the spike protein from getting into the blood. Drugs targeting autoimmune and other types of immune dysfunction are being tested via a Phase 2 trial of the FcRn receptor antagonist efgartigimod, a Phase 3 trial of the JAK inhibitor baricitinib, and two trials of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). Pharmaceutical industry-led trials include those of rintatolimod, an immunomodulator previously trialed for ME/CFS; BC007, a drug targeting G protein-coupled receptor autoantibodies; and temelimab, a monoclonal antibody targeting Human Endogenous Retrovirus-W proteins. Other trials are testing interventions that may manage symptoms, including antihistamines, low-dose naltrexone (LDN), and transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation.

3. Therapeutic candidates and research to inform clinical trial priorities
Since Long COVID has no approved treatments, all drugs are prescribed off-label or for conditions that result from it. Due to the wide variety of symptoms and underlying biological presentations of Long COVID, as well as the inconsistent responses to treatments documented in both Long COVID and other IACCIs to date, there is likely not a single intervention or cure, but rather a variety of treatments that may be helpful for different Long COVID phenotypes and pathologies. Given the variety of potential mechanisms that may contribute to Long COVID, we encourage the rigorous study of diverse drugs, including antivirals, anticoagulants, checkpoint inhibitors, BTK inhibitors, JAK inhibitors, IL-1 blockers, IL-6 antagonists, TNF-alpha inhibitors, poly(I:C), immunomodulators including IVIG and immunoadsorption, monoclonal antibodies, prescription mast cell stabilizers, drugs that regulate microglial activation, mitochondrial treatments, DRP-1 inhibitors, and drugs used for dysautonomia. Regenerative medicine treatments for Long COVID, such as stem cells, also hold promise.

Many of these medications are prescribed at Long COVID and ME/CFS clinics. We recommend that specialty clinics treating Long COVID, ME/CFS, dysautonomia, and other IACCIs track and disseminate information about the efficacy of experimental and repurposed medications. This knowledge-sharing will enable clinicians outside these clinics to consider prescribing these therapeutics and enable the identification of candidates for clinical trials.

Big data and machine learning can be leveraged to identify repurposed drugs and inform clinical trial priorities. For example, artificial intelligence predictions led to the identification of baricitinib as an agent that could reduce both viral load and inflammation in severe acute COVID-19, and its clinical efficacy in this setting was later proven; a clinical trial of baricitinib for Long COVID is now underway.

4. Comprehensively characterizing trial cohorts
Comprehensively characterizing Long COVID cohorts enables researchers to identify phenotypes that are more responsive to specific treatments, and to assess any unexpected impacts on a variety of pathologies and symptoms. Long COVID both commonly induces and co-occurs with a number of comorbid conditions. About half of people with Long COVID meet diagnostic criteria for ME/CFS, and between 28% and 79% of people with Long COVID meet diagnostic criteria for POTS.

Although much mechanistic research has focused on more commonly known and studied pathologies such as immune and neurocognitive dysfunction, there are many less studied aspects of Long COVID that can significantly impact patients' clinical presentation and quality of life. We recommend a diverse array of clinical trials that can target various types of symptoms that people with Long COVID may have. For example, one study found that 41% of Long COVID patients experienced moderate to severe sleep issues; a meta-analysis found that 22% of Long COVID patients experience gastrointestinal symptoms; and 33%-62% of pre-menopausal female Long COVID patients report an exacerbation of their Long COVID symptoms before menses. Further, people with certain pre-existing conditions, such as joint hypermobility and endometriosis, may have an increased risk for developing Long COVID. It is therefore imperative that clinical trials comprehensively screen Long COVID participants for and track the full spectrum of symptoms and comorbid conditions. This also involves screening for less studied pathologies, such as connective tissue disorders and spinal conditions; mast cell activation disorders and environmental sensitivities; neuroendocrine dysfunction; gastrointestinal issues, sleep disorders, lymphatic issues; and reproductive health conditions. Symptom surveys should take into account reproductive phases. Assessing for duration of symptoms and comorbid illnesses is critical, especially as duration of ME/CFS has been found to influence symptoms, physical functioning, and immune signatures. For example, individuals under 55 with an illness duration over 10 years have been found to have decreases in physical functioning and increases in autonomic, neuroendocrine, and immune symptoms, compared to those with illness duration under 10 years. Further, cytokine alterations have been shown to correlate with illness duration and severity.

Surveys should ask about illness onset and known triggers, as ME/CFS patients report a variety of illness triggers and onset patterns. While Long COVID is caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection, it is important to screen for other infections, viral reactivations, injuries, and environmental exposures that may contribute to pathologies and symptoms, when possible. PEM should also always be measured.

5. Clinical trial types
Utilizing multi-arm, geographically-broad clinical trials can make efficient use of clinical trial resources. For example, the field can gain efficiencies by combining multiple trials through a master protocol, with methods including basket trials, umbrella trials, and platform trials. Potential efficiencies include completing one regulatory review process for a multi-drug trial (rather than one review per drug), and the potential to offer a drug to more than half of participants through a multi-arm trial that shares a control arm. Multi-site trials should be considered to increase participation and recruit from diverse geographic areas. This could include the use of a coordinated and collaborative network to efficiently study several therapies across cohorts, validate the results of smaller trials, and standardize outcomes across research teams. Enabling remote participation should also be considered. We also recommend a treatment waitlist for control populations, enabling them to access the treatment at no cost if it is shown to be effective. This is a way to respect the effort that control participants put into the trials as well as their essential role; it may also help with trial recruitment.

Basket trials are used primarily in oncology research to evaluate a therapy on cancers that originate from different tissues yet have shared molecular underpinnings. This type of trial should be considered for Long COVID and other IACCIs, including ME/CFS and POTS, since emerging research suggests that subsets of these illnesses share some disease mechanisms. By including multiple illness comparator cohorts, trials could assess whether a given therapeutic has an effect on potential shared mechanisms. Understanding how generalizable treatments are across viruses and other ME/CFS causes can benefit not just those with Long COVID but also those who develop ME/CFS in the future, including from future pandemics.

Umbrella trials are used to evaluate multiple therapies on a single disease with multiple subsets that may respond to different treatments. Given the heterogeneity of Long COVID, and the evolving research on its phenotypes, umbrella trials could help identify subsets that are most likely to respond to different treatments. Since it is unlikely that one treatment will benefit all people with Long COVID, this multiple-therapy trial design could help therapeutics research progress more quickly and efficiently.

Platform trials are adaptive randomized control trials that allow for the addition or discontinuation of study arms. This design can help the field rapidly meet the patient community's urgent need for treatments. Finally, clinical care will likely involve a combination of treatments, and trial design should reflect this.

The decision of what clinical trial type to pursue will depend largely on the funding available, interventions selected, and skills of the team. The ideal trial would be well-funded and well-powered, begin with individual pharmaceutical interventions that match mechanisms of action to disease presentation, and then iterate. Interventions that prove successful with one population can be trialed both in other populations and in combination with complementary therapies (unless they lead to complete remission). Whenever possible, we encourage multi-drug trials that share a control arm so that a larger proportion of participants receive active intervention.

6. Enabling and encouraging representative participation
6.1. Condition-specific limitations
Clinical trial design for people with Long COVID should consider condition-specific limitations; in particular, many individuals have severe energy limitations, PEM, cognitive dysfunction, and/or an inability to be upright for long. For example, some people with ME/CFS struggle to send a single text message in a day, while others could complete an in-person clinic visit. Patients' energy can vary by the day. All participants should be screened for illness severity and be accommodated accordingly, and methodologies for this should be standardized when possible. It is critical to design trials in a way that minimizes short or long-term symptom exacerbation, including limiting required data collection to only the essential data points, limiting biospecimen collection to the minimal volume needed, offering research staff to go to the participant for any in-person activities, recommending and allowing last-minute cancellations for participants experiencing bad-symptom days, offering physical and study task assistance if the participant would like it, offering multiple modalities of providing data (e.g. on paper, via a screen, verbally), allowing for a caregiver to provide responses and/or help participants with study activities if needed, and breaking data activities into small pieces to be completed over time. Study staff should also ask participants if they have any accommodation needs that the study has not proactively provided.

6.2. Remote participation and inclusion of severely ill and rural patients
Trials that support remote participation are a proven way to improve participation by eligible individuals across the country, including those who have historically had limited access to clinical trials such as those in rural areas. Furthermore, at-home trials are necessary to include moderate and severe Long COVID patients whose disabilities prevent or increase the risk of in-person visits. Including these patients is critical: a quarter of ME/CFS patients are bedbound or homebound, with 61% reporting being bedbound on very symptomatic days, and 23.8% of people with Long COVID reporting “significant activity limitations from Long COVID.” At-home trial design may include remote participation, repeated measures, symptom tracking by apps, study staff visiting participants in their homes for sample collection or other testing, and biological sample collection kits such as oral swabs or at-home blood collection devices that participants can mail in.

6.3. Including under-represented populations
It is critical to recruit and include marginalized populations and those who have been historically underrepresented in clinical trials, such racial and ethnic minorities, bedbound and housebound individuals, and women, and TGD people. It is important that cohorts reflect the Long COVID patient population; women, transgender and gender diverse people, Hispanic, and multiracial populations have an elevated risk for Long COVID. A nationally representative survey of 27,651 US adults living in non-metropolitan (7.7%) and medium-and small-metropolitan areas (7.6%) were more likely to ever have Long COVID than adults residing in large metropolitan areas (6.3%), underscoring the importance of including rural populations in clinical trial cohorts.

6.4. In-person visits
If a study requires in-person clinic visits, it is important to implement protocols to ensure this is done safely. Because reinfections are high risk for the general population and COVID-19 has already worsened the health of people with Long COVID, studies should (a) provide well-ventilated spaces, (b) properly wear high-quality masks in all interactions, and (c) have a protocol for symptom surveillance and routine COVID-19 testing of study staff. Second, in-person requirements should be as brief and low-impact as possible for participants to avoid triggering PEM from over-exertion; PEM should only ever be induced intentionally where it is explicitly being studied, as in the case of 2-day cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET). As a corollary, we recommend setting aside space that participants can rest–ideally a dark, quiet room where they can lay down–so that they may take time to recover from the study activities before traveling to their home. This need is particularly acute in the case of any physical exertion, such as a six-minute walk test or 2-day CPET, which is likely to push some participants outside their energy envelopes. Third, the symptom state of the participant should be tracked during the visit – for example, whether participants experience a shift from their baseline at the beginning of testing, whether they experience PEM, etc. Fourth, studies should follow up with participants a couple days to a week following testing to assess if participants experienced PEM following the visit, as PEM onset can be immediate or delayed. It is crucial to understand whether the trial induces PEM because PEM can temporarily harm participants and/or can lead to long-term reductions in life functioning; it can alter survey and test results. As part of protecting human subjects from harm, it is the Principal Investigator's responsibility to ensure that trial participation is designed to avoid causing PEM as much as possible, only inducing it as part of intentional study design.

6.5. Long COVID eligibility criteria
Allowing for the inclusion of clinically diagnosed and self-reported cases of COVID-19, as opposed to requiring a positive test result, is more inclusive of those who did not have access to COVID tests. Even at the height of testing, through September 2021, only an estimated 25% of COVID cases in the United States were documented according to the CDC. Further, PCR and antigen tests produce false negative results more than half of the time; false negative results are more common in pediatric populations. Using antibody testing to determine eligibility is also not recommended as many people never seroconvert and others serorevert, with seroreversion being much more common in women and mild cases.

7. Other clinical trial considerations
There are many additional considerations in clinical trial design for the Long COVID population. It is important to conduct studies in multiple languages as needed by participants. Participants should ideally be compensated for their time and energy as well as risk they are undertaking trialing a treatment. In studies that cannot offer compensation, other incentives could be included in trial design, such as allowing participants to keep wearable devices used for data collection.

Participants should have the option to receive access to their own data, which can aid in recruitment and retention. This is even more important if the results are clinically actionable and/or include information that participants otherwise may not have access to - e.g. immune findings, microclot assays, or CPET - some of which may be able to aid patients' disability benefit applications. While institutional policies sometimes hamper data sharing, we encourage those policies to change. Some results may not be clinically actionable, and consideration should be given on how and when to share them. In general, we recommend allowing participants the opportunity to consent to receive any information about themselves. For example, participants may find it interesting to know that they have viral RNA in their blood even though it is not clear which treatment might address this in people with Long COVID. Trials returning complex results and/or clinical interpretations should have study staff who can communicate with patients about their results.

Integrating patient perspectives into all phases of the research process can help ensure that Long COVID clinical trials are effective and accessible; the Patient-Led Research Scorecards can help study teams conceptualize meaningful partnership with patients and self-evaluate their efforts. Drawing on a long history of community-based participatory research practices, this can translate into easier recruitment, better outcomes, and more broadly applicable results.

Long COVID lacks diagnostic biomarkers. Even while it is possible that the underlying mechanisms are the same, there is some heterogeneity in clinical presentation, which can present challenges for cohort selection and statistical power. Ongoing mechanistic clinical studies and phenotyping research aims to inform cohort eligibility and selection. Recruiting severe patients may be more challenging than recruiting mild to moderate patients, and we recommend working with patient organizations on recruitment strategies and to raise awareness of recruitment.

8. Endpoints
Determining the correct endpoints is a crucial part of Long COVID clinical trial design. Strong endpoints and outcome measures are possible even in the absence of a specific biomarker.

For primary endpoints, quality of life and patient-reported outcome tools can be helpful, but only where they are representative of the nuances of infection-onset energy-limited conditions like Long COVID. New tools like the FUNCAP, which more accurately measure the change in functional capacity in these conditions, are promising. Endpoints should aim for large improvements (e.g. at least 20% reduction of a specific symptom) that have clinical relevance so that 1) trials are designed to detect interventions that will substantially improve the lives of people with Long COVID, and 2) trials that meet their endpoints are likely to be utilized by clinicians. Conversely, we do not recommend overpowering trials to the extent that they can detect very small changes; due to limited resources, it would be more efficient to test two interventions.

Data on the most disabling symptoms should be measured to understand which subsets of the patient population will respond well to an intervention. Tools measuring common symptoms should be included as endpoints, such as 2-day CPET which captures PEM, and COMPASS-31 which captures autonomic dysfunction. Cognitive dysfunction should be measured through tools that capture specific types of impairment common to Long COVID, not general tools designed for other cognitive conditions.

Biomedical endpoints should be included alongside other endpoints as often as possible. This will continue to demonstrate the biological basis of the illness and allow the potential to uncover biological correlates with treatment response. Reduced cerebral blood flow has been a consistent finding when measured with a transcranial doppler ultrasound during tilt table testing, and was a better marker than heart rate and blood pressure. Several additional options that have been found to be abnormal in existing Long COVID research and other IACCIs include natural killer cells functioning, T-cell functioning, levels of latent herpesviruses and infections, and blood lactate levels. As new tests and technologies are developed, including tests to identify viral persistence, microclots, nerve damage, endothelial damage, and wearables for cerebral perfusion, these should be used in endpoints as well. High resolution imaging to detect both viral persistence and inflammation should be used wherever possible.

Equally important as using the right endpoints is to avoid using the ineffective and unsuitable endpoints. Trial success should be measured through physiological improvements. As Long COVID is not a somaticized illness and only a subset of patients experience psychiatric symptoms, primary endpoints should never be mental health outcomes except in limited cases where a trial is exploring a specific condition onset from COVID that has a mental health component (e.g. psychosis or premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD)). Where mental health symptoms are being tracked as secondary outcomes, it is critical not to use anxiety and depression tools that include physical symptoms - such as fatigue, sleep issues, difficulty concentrating, and heart palpitations - as these may generate false positive scores and bias results. Tools that include somatic symptoms, such as the PHQ-9, Beck Anxiety Inventory, and Beck Depression Inventory, can be replaced with the PHQ-2, GAD-7, or HADS, or subscales of PROMIS-29.

Organizations running trials should coordinate and collect shared outcomes of interest in order to allow for potential meta-analyses and collective comparison of treatment efficacy.

9. Conclusion
There is an urgent need to advance research on Long COVID towards clinical trials that are responsive to patient-driven questions and needs. Trials should prioritize potentially curative interventions, including repurposed drugs and the development of new drugs. Patients may also benefit from different combinations of therapies, which should be considered in clinical trial design. Trial design should consider illness comparator cohorts, as well as multiple therapeutic arms, such as basket, umbrella, and platform trials. Trials should be both rigorous and accessible – for example, parallel triple-blinded randomized trials that can be conducted remotely and/or without participants needing to leave their home. Studies should include historically under-represented participants, such as severe housebound and bedbound patients; gender, racially, and ethnically diverse individuals; and those living in rural areas. Finally, patient-led studies and studies with patient scientists and high patient engagement are most likely to meet these recommendations, and support the design of effective and comprehensive research. With collaborative thoughtful study design and a focus on clinically translational, high-impact research, promising treatments for Long COVID will hopefully emerge.